 BARRON'S BOOK NOTES (tm) on CD-ROM  Windows (tm) Ver. 2.0
Great Gatsby  F. Scott Fitzgerald
---------------------------------------------------------
                                      1925                                  
                                                                            
                             F. SCOTT FITZGERALD'S                          
                                THE GREAT GATSBY                            
                                                                            
                              by Anthony S. Abbott                          
                              Professor of English                          
                                Davidson College                            
                                                                            
                                 SERIES EDITOR                              
                            Michael Spring, Editor,                         
                      Literary Cavalcade, Scholastic Inc.                   
                                                                            
                                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS                             
  We would like to acknowledge the many painstaking hours of work Holly     
Hughes                                                                      
  and Thomas F. Hirsch have devoted to making the Book Notes series a       
success.                                                                    
                                                                            
            (C) Copyright 1984 by Barron's Educational Series, Inc.         
                                                                            
   Electronically Enhanced Text (C) Copyright 1993, World Library, Inc.     
                                                                            
CONTENTS                                                                    
                               CONTENTS                                     
                  SECTION.......................... SEARCH ON               
                                                                            
          THE AUTHOR AND HIS TIMES................. FGREAUTH                
                                                                            
          THE NOVEL                                                         
          The Plot................................. FGREPLOT                
          The Characters........................... FGRECHAR                
          Other Elements                                                    
               Setting............................. FGRESETT                
               Themes.............................. FGRETHEM                
               Style............................... FGRESTYL                
               Point of View....................... FGREVIEW                
               Form and Structure.................. FGREFORM                
          THE STORY................................ FGRESTOR                
                                                                            
          A STEP BEYOND                                                     
          Tests and Answers........................ FGRETEST                
          Term Paper Ideas......................... FGRETERM                
          Glossary................................. FGREGLOS                
          The Critics.............................. FGRECRIT                
                                                                            
          Advisory Board........................... FGREADVB                
                                                                            
          Bibliography............................. FGREBIBL                
                                                                            
AUTHOR_AND_HIS_TIMES                                                        
                       THE AUTHOR AND HIS TIMES             (FGREAUTH)      
-                                                                           
  Have you ever felt that there were two of you battling for control        
of the person you call yourself? Have you ever felt that you weren't        
quite sure which one you wanted to be in charge? All of us have at          
least two selves: one who wants to work hard, get good grades, and          
be successful; and one who would rather lie in the sun and listen to        
music and daydream. To understand F. Scott Fitzgerald, the man and the      
writer, you must begin with the idea of doubleness, or twoness.             
  Fitzgerald himself said in a famous series of essays called The           
Crack Up, "the test of a first-rate intelligence is the ability to          
hold two opposed ideas in the mind at the same time, and still              
retain the ability to function." Everything about Fitzgerald is             
touched by this idea. For example, he both loved and hated money. He        
was attracted to the life of the very rich as an outsider who had very      
little, and at the same time he hated the falseness and hypocrisy           
and cruelty of their lives. He was disciplined, knowing that he had to      
have great mental and physical self-control to succeed as a writer,         
but he was often unable to exercise those very qualities he knew he         
would need in order to succeed. He loved his wife Zelda more than           
anything in his life, and yet he hated her for destroying his               
talent. Part of him lived a dazzling life full of parties, gaiety, and      
show; and part of him knew that this sort of life was a complete sham.      
  All of this doubleness Fitzgerald puts into the novel you are             
about to read: The Great Gatsby. As you begin reading think about Nick      
Carraway, the narrator of the novel, and Jay Gatsby, the hero of the        
novel, as the two sides of Fitzgerald. Think of Fitzgerald as               
putting into his two main characters both of the people that he knew        
he had within him. As you read, ask yourself whether or not you have        
these two people within you: Nick, the intelligent and disciplined          
observer; and Gatsby, the passionate and idealistic dreamer who             
wants his dream so much that he will sacrifice everything for it.           
  Fitzgerald himself seemed genetically destined for doubleness. His        
mother's father, P. F. McQuillan, went to St. Paul, Minnesota, in           
1857, at the age of twenty-three. In twenty years he built up-              
literally from nothing- an enormously successful wholesale business.        
He was a totally self-made man, and from him Scott inherited a sense        
of self-reliance and a belief in hard work. The Fitzgeralds, on the         
other hand, were an old Maryland family. Scott himself- Francis             
Scott Key Fitzgerald was his full name- was named for his great,            
great, great grandfather's brother, the man who wrote "The Star             
Spangled Banner." And Edward Fitzgerald, Scott's father, was a              
handsome, charming man, but one who seemed more interested in the           
family name than in hard work.                                              
  The McQuillan and the Fitzgerald in Scott vied for control                
throughout his childhood. He was a precocious child, full of energy         
and imagination, but he liked to take short cuts, substituting flights      
of fantasy for hard work. On his seventh birthday in 1903 he told a         
number of the older guests that he was the owner of a yacht (perhaps        
the seeds of Gatsby's admiration for Dan Cody's yacht in the novel).        
As an adolescent he loved to play theatrical games- pretending to be        
drunk on a streetcar or telephoning an artificial limb company to           
discuss being fitted for a false limb. He was an excellent writer           
and a vivid satirist of his classmates, but his marks were not good;        
so, like so many Midwestern boys, he was shipped East to boarding           
school, where he would be taught discipline and hard work.                  
  In September of 1911, with the words and music of Irving Berlin's         
new song "Alexander's Ragtime Band" uppermost on his mind, he enrolled      
at the Newman School in Hackensack, New Jersey, a popular Roman             
Catholic school among Midwestern families. Here he was to have two          
years to ready himself for a good Ivy League College, preferably            
Princeton or Yale. Scott chose Princeton, but Princeton very nearly         
didn't choose him.                                                          
  The doubleness in Scott is beautifully illustrated by the way in          
which he maneuvered himself into Princeton. An avid writer and reader,      
Fitzgerald tended to read what he liked and ignore his school work,         
and therefore he failed his entrance exams during his senior year.          
After a "summer of study," he took them again and failed them again.        
Finally on September 24, 1913, his seventeenth birthday, he appeared        
before the Admissions Committee and convinced them to accept him.           
Personal magnetism was able to achieve what hard work had not.              
  One of the things Scott inherited from his Grandfather McQuillan was      
ambition. Scott was a fierce competitor, and if he wanted something         
badly enough he could work like a demon. What Scott wanted were             
women and popularity, and the way to win women and be popular, he           
had learned at Newman, was with money, good looks, and athletics. He        
didn't have the first, but he had the second, and he worked very, very      
hard at the third by trying out for freshman football. His problem was      
that he was only 5' 6" and weighed only 130 pounds, which doesn't           
get one very far in football. So he scrapped the football pads and          
found another outlet for his energy and his ambition: writing               
musical comedies. One of the most prestigious organizations at              
Princeton was and still is the Triangle Club, a group that writes           
and produces a musical comedy every year. (Among its graduates are the      
actors Jimmy Stewart and Jose Ferrer.)                                      
  Fitzgerald devoted most of his energies at Princeton to the Triangle      
Show, writing the book and lyrics in his freshman year and the              
lyrics in his sophomore year. He was elected secretary of the club,         
and was in line to become its president- something he wanted more than      
anything in his life. But it was not to be. In December of 1915, the        
fall of his junior year, he was sent home with malaria. He was told         
when he returned in March that he would have to fall back a year and        
that he was academically ineligible for the Triangle presidency. In         
the spring of 1917 his class graduated, and Scott was left behind to        
complete his senior year. He never did; instead, he enlisted in the         
army.                                                                       
  Why? Perhaps because he wanted to be a hero, and the United States        
was about to make the world safe for democracy. Perhaps because             
college was no fun anymore. Perhaps because beautiful women love young      
men in uniform. Whatever the reason, Fitzgerald left Princeton in           
November and found himself in the summer of 1918 stationed at Camp          
Sheridan, outside Montgomery, Alabama. Here 2nd Lieutenant Scott            
Fitzgerald met Miss Zelda Sayre, who was to become his wife and the         
single most important influence on his life. Zelda was seventeen,           
and a combination of tomboy and Southern belle. She was used to having      
her own way with her traditional parents, and she very much enjoyed         
being courted by the officers from Camp Sheridan, just as Daisy in The      
Great Gatsby is courted by the young officers at Camp Taylor.               
  It was love at first sight. Just as Jay Gatsby, an outsider with          
no money and no respectable family, falls utterly in love with Daisy        
Fay, so the Midwestern outsider Scott Fitzgerald fell head over             
heels in love with the Montgomery belle Zelda Sayre. He loved her           
beauty, her daring, her originality. He loved her crazy, romantic           
streak which matched his own. He proposed to her, and she turned him        
down. Like Jay Gatsby, he was too young and he had no money, and she        
could not be sure he would ever amount to anything.                         
  So he went off to war but, unlike Gatsby, he never got to Europe. By      
the time his regiment had been sent overseas, the Armistice had been        
signed and his dreams of military glory had to be set aside with the        
football pads and the presidency of the Triangle Club. But Scott was        
determined to be famous, and in March of 1919- this time like Nick          
Carraway- he went to New York to learn his trade. Scott's trade was         
writing and he had written, during his long, lonely months in the           
army, a novel about life at boarding school and at Princeton. But no        
one would publish it and Zelda, who had finally promised to marry him,      
changed her mind. In what he called his "long summer of despair," he        
went home to St. Paul, rewrote his novel, and submitted it to               
Charles Scribner's Sons. Maxwell Perkins, a young editor who was to         
become Fitzgerald's friend and supporter for life, accepted the             
book. In March of 1920, Scott Fitzgerald's first novel, This Side of        
Paradise, was published.                                                    
  This Side of Paradise made Fitzgerald famous. It also made Zelda          
change her mind again. On April 3, 1920, in the Rectory of St.              
Patrick's Cathedral in New York City, they were married. Within two         
years they became the most notorious young couple in America,               
symbolizing what Fitzgerald called The Jazz Age.                            
  The Jazz Age began, Fitzgerald tells us in his short story, "May          
Day," in May of 1918. It ended with the stock market crash of 1929.         
The Jazz Age brought about one of the most rapid and pervasive changes      
in manners and morals the world has ever seen, changes that we are          
still wrestling with today. It was a period when the younger                
generation- men and women alike- were rebelling against the values and      
customs of their parents and grandparents. After all, the older             
generation had led thousands of young men into the most brutal and          
senseless war in human history. People of Fitzgerald's age had seen         
death, and when they came back, they were determined to have a good         
time. "How you gonna keep 'em down on the farm, now that they've            
seen Paree" was one of the most popular songs of the day.                   
  And have a good time they did. The saxophone replaced the violin;         
skirt hemlines went up; corsets came off; women started smoking; and        
Prohibition, which was supposed to stop drinking, only reshaped it          
into secret fun. The public saloon, now illegal, was replaced by the        
private cocktail party, and men and women began drinking together.          
Parties like the ones given by Gatsby began to thrive, and hoodlums         
became millionaires in a few months by controlling the bootleg              
liquor business.                                                            
  Scott and Zelda not only chronicled the age, they lived it. They          
rode down Fifth Avenue on the tops of taxis; they dove into the             
fountain in front of New York's famous Plaza Hotel. Scott fought            
with waiters, and Zelda danced on tabletops. They drank too much and        
passed out in corners; they drove recklessly and gave weekend parties,      
which were not too different from the ones Gatsby gives in the novel        
and which lasted until the small hours of Monday morning.                   
  In the midst of all this, Fitzgerald tried to write. Part of him          
believed in work and tried repeatedly to discipline himself, to go "on      
the wagon," to give up parties.                                             
  Many years later in a beautiful letter to his daughter Scottie, he        
talked about the tension of those years: "When I was your age I             
lived with a great dream. The dream grew and I learned to speak of          
it and make people listen. Then the dream divided one day when I            
decided to marry your mother... I was a man divided- she wanted me          
to work too much for her and not enough for my dream."                      
  The dream, of course, was his dream of being a great writer. This         
Side of Paradise had made him famous because it was the first novel         
that honestly described the life-style of the new generation, but           
his work during the first three years of his marriage was not nearly        
what he knew it could have been, and so in 1923 he set out to write         
a book that he could be proud of. In July 1923, Zelda wrote a               
friend: "Scott has started a new novel and retired into strict              
seclusion and celibacy." The new novel of course was The Great Gatsby,      
and the ten months he devoted to that novel was artistically the            
most disciplined ten months of his life. The novel was published in         
the spring of 1925. Though sales were disappointing, the criticism was      
very positive. Great writers like the novelist Edith Wharton and the        
poet T. S. Eliot wrote Fitzgerald letters of congratulations. And           
Gertrude Stein, who called Fitzgerald and Ernest Hemingway members          
of a "lost generation," gave great praise to the book. Hemingway            
himself, a new friend of Fitzgerald's in 1925, loved The Great Gatsby.      
  Fitzgerald was never again to reach the success of Gatsby. Until          
1925 the Nick Carraway in him had sustained him enough to keep him          
writing well, but just as Gatsby's love for Daisy drove him to              
tragedy, so Fitzgerald's love for Zelda occupied more and more of           
his time. To maintain the social style she loved, he wrote stories for      
the popular magazines of the time, like Cosmopolitan, Smart Set, and        
the Saturday Evening Post. Maintaining a dizzying social life,              
Scott, Zelda, and their daughter Scottie moved from New York City to        
Great Neck, Long Island (the model for West Egg in Gatsby), eventually      
on to Paris and the Riviera, and finally back to the United States. He      
could not finish another novel, and he could not make Zelda happy. She      
became more and more depressed, and finally in April 1930, Zelda had a      
complete breakdown and had to be hospitalized.                              
  The great stock market crash of 1929 had ended America's decade of        
prosperity, and Zelda's breakdown in 1930 ended the Fitzgerald's            
decade as the symbol of The Jazz Age. The party was over.                   
  From 1930 until his death in Hollywood in 1940, Scott struggled to        
regain the stature he had earned with The Great Gatsby, but he never        
could. He wrote Tender is the Night, which is a beautiful novel,            
during the early '30s, but when the book was published in 1934,             
America was not interested in a story about rich Americans partying on      
the French Riviera. This was the Depression, and the novelists in           
demand were Sherwood Anderson and John Steinbeck, writers who talked        
about the plight of poor people. Scott continued to care for Zelda,         
who was to spend the rest of her life in and out of sanitariums. He         
also kept writing. But during 1935 and 1936 he had his own                  
breakdown, which he recorded brilliantly in the series of essays for        
Esquire called "The Crack Up."                                              
  Desperate for money, he took a job as a script writer for M-G-M in        
1937, where he worked on and off for the next two years. With the           
support of his friend the columnist Sheilah Graham, in 1939 he began a      
new novel. Called The Last Tycoon, this book was based on the career        
of the legendary Hollywood producer Irving Thalberg, whom Fitzgerald        
greatly admired. But Fitzgerald's years of dissipation caught up            
with him, and he died of a heart attack on December 21, 1940. Even          
unfinished, The Last Tycoon is a fine novel, almost as good as Gatsby.      
But for a long time the world didn't know that. At the time of his          
death all of Fitzgerald's books were out of print. Scott who? Oh, that      
guy that used to write about the '20s.                                      
  Well, he was much more than that, and during the 1950s and 1960s          
people started reading Scott Fitzgerald again. Today he is                  
considered one of America's great novelists. The Great Gatsby, along        
with The Scarlet Letter and Huckleberry Finn, has become a book we          
can't do without if we want to understand ourselves. Fitzgerald asks        
us to read this book with that same double vision with which he             
wrote it. He asks us to participate emotionally in the lives of its         
characters, especially Gatsby. And he asks us to stand back from            
them as Nick does and see what is wrong with them. He asks us to            
love and to evaluate at the same time, perhaps in the say way that          
Nick both loves and criticizes Gatsby.                                      
                                                                            
THE_PLOT                                                                    
                              THE NOVEL                                     
-                                                                           
                               THE PLOT                     (FGREPLOT)      
-                                                                           
  Nick Carraway, the narrator, is a young Midwesterner who, having          
graduated from Yale in 1915 and fought in World War I ("The Great           
War"), has returned home to begin a career. Like others in his              
generation, he is restless and has decided to move East to New York         
and learn the bond business. The novel opens early in the summer of         
1922 in West Egg, Long Island, where Nick has rented a house. Next          
to his place is a huge mansion complete with Gothic tower and marble        
swimming pool, which belongs to a Mr. Gatsby, whom Nick has not met.        
  Directly across the bay from West Egg is the more fashionable             
community of East Egg, where Tom and Daisy Buchanan live. Daisy is          
Nick's cousin and Tom, a well-known football player at Yale, had            
been in the same senior society as Nick in New Haven. Like Nick,            
they are Midwesterners who have come East to be a part of the               
glamour and mystery of the New York City area. They invite Nick to          
dinner at their mansion, and here he meets a young woman golfer             
named Jordan Baker, a friend of Daisy's from Louisville, whom Daisy         
wants Nick to become interested in.                                         
  During dinner the phone rings, and when Tom and Daisy leave the           
room, Jordan informs Nick that the caller is a "woman of Tom's from         
New York."                                                                  
  The woman's name is Myrtle Wilson, and she lives in a strange,            
fantastic place half way between West Egg and New York City that            
Fitzgerald calls the "valley of ashes." The valley of ashes consists        
of huge ash heaps and a faded yellow brick building containing an           
all-night restaurant and George Wilson's garage. Painted on a large         
billboard nearby is a fading advertisement for an optician: the eyes        
of Dr. T. J. Eckleburg, gazing out over this wasteland through a            
pair of enormous yellow spectacles.                                         
  One day Tom takes Nick to meet the Wilsons. Myrtle joins them on the      
next train to Manhattan, and the threesome ends up, along with a dog        
Myrtle buys at Pennsylvania Station, at the apartment Tom has rented        
for his meetings with Myrtle. Myrtle's sister Catherine and an              
unattractive couple from downstairs named McKee join them, and the six      
proceed to get quite drunk. The party breaks up violently when              
Myrtle starts using Daisy's name in a familiar fashion and Tom, in          
response, breaks her nose with a blow of his open hand.                     
  Some weeks later Nick finally gets the opportunity to meet his            
mysterious neighbor Mr. Gatsby. Gatsby gives huge parties, complete         
with catered food, open bars, and orchestras. People come from              
everywhere to attend these parties, but no one seems to know much           
about the host. Legends about Jay Gatsby abound. Some say he was a          
German spy during the war, others, that he once killed a man. Nick          
becomes fascinated by Gatsby. He begins watching his host and               
notices that Gatsby does not drink or join in the revelry of his own        
parties.                                                                    
  One day Gatsby and Nick drive to New York together. Gatsby tells          
Nick that he's from a wealthy family in the Midwest, that he was            
educated at Oxford, and that he won war medals from many European           
countries. Nick isn't sure what to believe. At lunch Gatsby introduces      
Nick to his business associate, Meyer Wolfsheim, "the man who fixed         
the World Series in 1919."                                                  
  At tea that afternoon Nick finds out from Jordan Baker why Gatsby         
has taken such an interest in him: Gatsby is in love with Daisy             
Buchanan and wants Nick to arrange a meeting between them. It seems         
that Gatsby, as a young officer at Camp Taylor in 1917, had fallen          
in love with Daisy, then Daisy Fay. He had been sent overseas, and she      
had eventually given him up, married Tom Buchanan, and had a daughter.      
When Gatsby finally returned from Europe he decided to win Daisy back.      
His first step was to buy a house in West Egg. From here he could look      
across the bay to the green light at the end of Daisy's dock. He            
expected her to turn up at one of his parties, and when she didn't, he      
asked Jordan to ask Nick to ask Daisy. And so Nick does.                    
  A few days later, in the rain, Gatsby and Daisy meet for the first        
time in five years. Gatsby is at first terrified, then tremendously         
excited. He takes Nick and Daisy on a tour of his house and grounds         
and shows them all his possessions, even his beautiful shirts from          
England. He shows Daisy the green light that he has been watching, and      
he insists that Klipspringer, "the boarder," play the piano for             
them. Klipspringer plays "Ain't We Got Fun," and Nick leaves.               
  Now, halfway through the book, Nick gives us some information             
about who Gatsby really is. He was originally James Gatz, the son of        
farm people from North Dakota. He had gone to St. Olaf College in           
Minnesota, dropped out because the college failed to promote his            
romantic dreams about himself, and ended up on the south shore of Lake      
Superior earning room and board by digging clams and fishing for            
salmon. One day he saw the beautiful yacht of the millionaire Dan Cody      
and borrowed a rowboat to warn Cody of an impending storm. Cody took        
the seventeen-year-old boy on as steward, mate, and secretary. When         
Cody died, he left the boy, now Jay Gatsby, a legacy of $25,000, which      
the boy never got because of the jealousy of Cody's mistress.               
  The story of Gatsby's past breaks off, and Nick resumes his               
narration of Gatsby's renewed courtship of Daisy during the summer          
of 1929. Daisy and Tom come to one of Gatsby's parties, but Tom is put      
off by the vulgarity of Gatsby's world, and Daisy does not have a good      
time. Though Gatsby has been seeing Daisy, he's increasingly                
frustrated by his inability to recreate the magic of their time             
together in Louisville five years before.                                   
  The affair between Daisy and Gatsby now comes out into the open.          
Tom, Daisy, Gatsby, Nick, and Jordan- the five major characters- all        
meet for lunch at the Buchanans and then decide to drive to New             
York. Daisy and Gatsby end up going together in the Buchanans' blue         
coupe, Tom, Nick, and Jordan drive in Gatsby's yellow Rolls Royce. The      
couple stop for gas at Wilson's garage, and Myrtle Wilson, watching         
from her window over the garage, thinks the car belongs to Tom.             
  The five arrive in the city and engage the parlor of a suite at           
the Plaza Hotel. Tom, drunk and agitated by now, starts ragging Gatsby      
about his past and attacking him for his phony English habit of             
calling people "old sport." Gatsby retaliates by telling Tom that           
Daisy is going to leave him. Tom calls Gatsby a cheap bootlegger. Like      
cowboys in the Old West, they duel back and forth for Daisy until           
Tom wins. Daisy will not go away with Gatsby, and the five-year             
dream is over. Tom sends Daisy and Gatsby home together in the              
yellow Rolls Royce, knowing that he has nothing more to fear. A couple      
of hours later Tom follows with Nick and Jordan. When they reach the        
valley of ashes, they see crowds of people in police cars. Someone was      
struck by a car coming from New York. That someone, they discover, was      
Myrtle Wilson, and the car had to be Gatsby's yellow Rolls Royce. When      
Nick gets back to East Egg, he finds Gatsby hiding in the shrubbery         
outside the Buchanans' house, unwilling to leave for fear that Tom          
might hurt Daisy. Gatsby tells Nick that Daisy was driving, but             
that- of course- he will take the blame. Nick leaves Gatsby                 
"watching over nothing."                                                    
  Nick goes to work the next morning, but is too worried about              
Gatsby to stay in New York. He takes an early train back to West Egg        
but arrives at Gatsby's too late. His friend's body is floating on          
an inflated mattress in the swimming pool, and George Wilson's dead         
body, revolver in hand, lies nearby on the grass. The crazed husband        
had spent the entire morning tracking down the driver of the yellow         
Rolls Royce. He found Gatsby before Nick did.                               
  Nick tries to phone Daisy and Tom, but is told they've left town          
with no forwarding address. Calls to Meyer Wolfsheim produce similar        
results. Nick, it seems, is Gatsby's only friend.                           
  News of Gatsby's murder is printed in a Chicago newspaper, where          
it is read by his father, Mr. Henry C. Gatz, now of Minnesota. Mr.          
Gatz arrives for the funeral, which is attended only by Nick, Owl Eyes      
(who loved Gatsby's books), and a smattering of servants. Meyer             
Wolfsheim, of course, has refused to get involved. Even Mr.                 
Klipspringer, "the boarder," has sent his excuses.                          
  Mr. Gatz, who loves his son very much, shows Nick a book which Jimmy      
owned as a boy. In the flyleaf Gatsby had written a schedule for            
self improvement: exercise, study, sport, and work. How far Gatsby had      
come from that dream, to this meaningless death!                            
  Disgusted and disillusioned by what he has experienced, Nick decides      
to leave New York and return to the Midwest. He ends his                    
relationship with Jordan Baker and learns from Tom Buchanan that it         
was he, Tom, who told Wilson where Gatsby lived. Before Nick leaves         
the East, he stands one more time on the beach near Gatsby's house          
looking out at the green light that his friend had worshipped. Here he      
pays his final tribute to Gatsby and to the dream for which he              
lived- and died.                                                            
                                                                            
THE_CHARACTERS                                                              
                            THE CHARACTERS                  (FGRECHAR)      
-                                                                           
  NICK CARRAWAY                                                             
  Nick Carraway is the narrator of The Great Gatsby; he is also a           
character in the novel. When you think about him, you have to think         
about what Fitzgerald is using him for. You also have to look at him        
as a person.                                                                
  Nick, is first of all, Fitzgerald's means of making his story more        
realistic. Because Nick is experiencing events and telling us about         
them in his own words, we're more likely to believe the story. After a      
while we almost begin to experience the events as Nick does; the I          
of each of us as readers replaces the I of Nick. (For more details,         
see "Point of View.")                                                       
  Nick is a narrator whose values you should have no trouble                
identifying or at least sympathizing with. He's not mad or blind to         
what's going on around him. He's a pretty solid young man who has           
graduated from Yale University, served his country in the First             
World War, and decided to go into the bond business. He comes from a        
solid Midwestern family, from whom he has learned some pretty basic         
values. He is honest, but not Puritanical or narrow minded. He is           
tolerant, understanding, and not hasty to judge people. He is the sort      
of person you might talk to if you wanted a sympathetic ear. But his        
toleration has limits. He doesn't approve of everything.                    
  These are some of the qualities that make Nick a reliable                 
narrator, someone whose story we are likely to believe. It seems often      
that his values are pretty close to those of the author.                    
  Nick is in a perfect position to tell the story. He is a cousin of        
Daisy Buchanan's, he was in the same senior society as Tom Buchanan at      
Yale, and he has rented, during the summer of 1922, a house right next      
to Jay Gatsby. He knows all the characters well enough to be present        
at the crucial scenes in the novel. The information he doesn't have         
but needs in order to tell his story, he gets from other characters         
like Jordan Baker, the Greek restaurant owner Michaelis, and Gatsby         
himself. Nick knows things because people confess to him, and people        
confess to him because he is tolerant, understanding, and sympathetic.      
  Nick has that capacity, which Fitzgerald felt was so terribly             
important (see The Author and His Times), of holding two contradictory      
opinions at the same time. He both admires Gatsby and disapproves of        
him. He admires Gatsby both because of his dream and because of his         
basic innocence; and he disapproves of Gatsby for his vulgar                
materialism and his corrupt business practices. (Nick does not want to      
become involved with Meyer Wolfsheim, Gatsby's underworld                   
"connection.")                                                              
  One of the things that makes Nick special is that he understands          
Gatsby. Nobody else in the novel-not even Daisy-really understands          
him. Nick is, at the novel's end, Gatsby's only friend, even though he      
disapproves of many things which Gatsby stands for. Almost nobody           
comes to Gatsby's funeral, and if it weren't for Nick, there would          
probably not even have been a funeral. Would you have gone?                 
  Some readers think Nick is too sympathetic to Gatsby. They think          
that Nick ought to be mature enough to see what is wrong with Gatsby's      
dream. They feel that Nick should be more critical of Gatsby, and           
force us as readers to be more critical, too. They believe that Nick        
in the closing pages, is too sentimental and that his judgment is           
not as reliable as we might think. There's no critical agreement on         
this issue, so you'll have to make up your own minds as you read the        
book.                                                                       
  As you're deciding about Nick's powers of judgment- particularly          
in the opening and closing pages where he talks about himself- keep in      
mind that Nick is a Midwesterner and his values are colored by the          
values of the world in which he grew up.                                    
  Many readers have remarked that the novel is based on a contrast          
between the solid, traditional, conservative Midwest and the                
glamorous, glittering, fast-paced world of the East. Nick (like             
Scott Fitzgerald, his creator) is from Minnesota. He comes East to          
experience the new and exciting world of New York that is very              
different from Minneapolis-St. Paul. At the end, he chooses to leave        
the East and return to the Midwest. By that choice he seems to be           
saying to us that he has tried the East and found it missing something      
he needs: a basic set of values. So he goes home, where values still        
exist. Think about the two worlds- the Midwest and the East and what        
they represented for Nick (and by extension, Fitzgerald) and what they      
might represent for you.                                                    
-                                                                           
  JAY GATSBY                                                                
  The title of this novel is The Great Gatsby. If you like                  
paradoxes, start with this one: he is neither great nor Gatsby (his         
real name was Gatz). He is a crook, a bootlegger who has involved           
himself with Meyer Wolfsheim, the man who fixed the 1919 World Series.      
He has committed crimes in order to buy the house he feels he needs to      
win the woman he loves, who happens to be another man's wife. Thus a        
central question for us as readers is, why should we love such a            
man? Or, to put it in other word, what makes Gatsby great? Why,             
despite all these things, does Fitzgerald invite us to cry out with         
Nick, "'They're a rotten crowd'... 'You're worth the whole damn             
bunch put together.'"?                                                      
  We are asked to love Gatsby, even admire him to a point, because          
of his dream. That dream is what separates Gatsby from what Nick calls      
the "foul dust [that] floated in the wake of his dreams..." It is           
not merely what is known as the American Dream of Success- the              
belief that every man can rise to success no matter what his                
beginnings. It is a kind of romantic idealism, "some heightened             
sensitivity to the promises of life," Nick calls it. It is a belief in      
fairytales and princesses and happy endings, a faith that life can          
be special, remarkable, beautiful. Gatsby is not interested in power        
for its own sake or in money or prestige. What he wants is his              
dream, and that dream is embodied in Daisy. He must have her, and,          
as the novel's epigraph on the title page suggests, he will do              
anything that is required in order to win her.                              
  But dreams don't always show on the outside. The Great Gatsby is a        
kind of mystery story with Gatsby as the mystery. Who is he? All the        
way through the novel people keep asking that question and answering        
it falsely. They answer it falsely because they aren't really               
interested in who Gatsby is. They have heard things about him- that he      
killed a man, that he was a German spy in World War I- and they pass        
these bits of gossip on to other people. So the myth of Gatsby- the         
collection of false stories about him- hides the Gatsby that we come        
gradually to know through the efforts of Nick Carraway. Nick genuinely      
cares who Gatsby is, and in Chapters IV, VI, VIII, and IX he                
presents us with the story of Gatsby's past as he has learned it            
from Jordan Baker, from Gatsby himself, and eventually, from                
Gatsby's father.                                                            
  No one else but Nick knows or understands Gatsby's background except      
maybe his father and Owl Eyes- and they, significantly, are the only        
ones present at his funeral. Fitzgerald invites us to share Nick's          
understanding of Gatsby as we read the novel. He makes us see behind        
the surface of the man who at first glance looks like a young               
roughneck. And he forces us to ask, as we finish the book, what this        
dream is that Gatsby has dedicated himself to. Is it a worthwhile           
dream? Is it our dream, too? Can we love Gatsby and be critical of his      
dream at the same time? Fitzgerald makes us ask these questions and         
then lets us find our own answers.                                          
-                                                                           
  TOM BUCHANAN                                                              
  Tom Buchanan, Nick tells us, "had been one of the most powerful ends      
that ever played football at New Haven- a national figure in a way,         
one of those men who reach such an acute limited excellence at              
twenty-one that everything afterward savors of anticlimax." He is also      
very wealthy, having brought a string of polo ponies from Lake              
Forest to Long Island. This double power- the size of his body and his      
bankroll- colors our feelings about Tom Buchanan.                           
  Because he is both very strong and very rich, Tom is used to              
having his own way. Nick describes him as having "a rather hard mouth"      
and "two shining arrogant eyes." When we first meet him in Chapter          
I, he reveals his crude belief in his own superiority by telling            
Nick that he has just read a book called The Rise of the Colored            
Empires. The book warns that if white people are not careful, the           
black races will rise up and overwhelm them. Tom clearly believes it.       
  Tom is having an affair with Myrtle Wilson, the wife of George            
Wilson, who runs a garage in the valley of ashes. Myrtle seems to have      
 a dark sexual vitality that attracts Tom, and he keeps an apartment        
for her in New York, where he takes Nick in Chapter II. Here he             
again shows how little he thinks of anyone beside himself when he           
casually breaks Myrtle's nose with the back of his hand, because she        
is shouting "Daisy! Daisy!" in a vulgar fashion.                            
  Between Chapters II and VII we see little of Tom, but in Chapter VII      
he emerges as a central figure. It is Tom who pushes the affair             
between Gatsby and Daisy out into the open by asking Gatsby point           
blank, "'What kind of a row are you trying to cause in my house             
anyway?" It is Tom who verbally outduels Gatsby to win his wife back        
and deflate his rival's dream. And it is Tom who, after the death of        
Myrtle Wilson, tells George Wilson that Gatsby was the killer and then      
hustles Daisy out of the area until the affair blows over.                  
  Fitzgerald describes Tom and Daisy as careless people who break           
things and then retreat into their wealth and let other people clean        
up their messes. It's a particularly apt metaphor for Tom, who              
cannot understand why Nick should have any ill feelings about Gatsby's      
death. After all, Tom was only protecting his wife. Nick shakes             
hands with Tom in the final chapter because "...I saw that what he had      
done was, to him, entirely justified." Yet Tom's behavior was not           
justifiable, and when Nick refers to the "foul dust" that floated in        
the wake of Gatsby's dream, he seems to be speaking of Tom Buchanan         
more than anyone else. It is Tom as much as anyone who sends Nick back      
to the Midwest, where there are still values one can believe in.            
-                                                                           
  DAISY FAY BUCHANAN                                                        
  She was born Daisy Fay in Louisville, Kentucky, and her color is          
white. When Jordan Baker, in Chapter IV, tells Nick about the first         
meeting between Gatsby and Daisy in October 1917, she says of Daisy,        
"She dressed in white, and had a little white roadster, and all day         
long the telephone rang in her house and excited young officers from        
Camp Taylor demanded the privilege of monopolizing her that night."         
  Throughout The Great Gatsby Daisy is described almost in fairytale        
language. The name Fay means "fairy" or "sprite." "Daisy," of               
course, suggests the flower, fresh and bright as spring, yet fragile        
and without the strength to resist the heat and dryness of summer.          
  Daisy is the princess in the tower, the golden girl that every man        
dreams of possessing. She is beautiful and rich and innocent and            
pure (at least on the surface) in her whiteness. But that whiteness,        
as you will notice, is mixed with the yellow of gold and the                
inevitable corruption that money brings. Though Daisy seems pure and        
white, she is a mixture of things, just like the flower for which           
she was named (see Schneider in "Critics").                                 
  Fitzgerald suggests the nature of this mixture beautifully in the         
famous passage from Chapter VII about her voice:                            
-                                                                           
  "She's got an indiscreet voice," I remarked. "It's full of-" I            
hesitated.                                                                  
  "Her voice is full of money," he said suddenly.                           
  That was it. I'd never understood it before. It was full of money-        
that was the inexhaustible charm that rose and fell in it, the              
jingle of it, the cymbals' song of it.... High in a white palace the        
king's daughter, the golden girl....                                        
-                                                                           
  Like money, Daisy promises more than she gives. Her voice seems to        
offer everything, but she's born to disappoint. She is the sort of          
person who is better to dream about than to actually possess.               
Fitzgerald- with that double vision we discussed in The Author and His      
Times section of this guide- knew very well both the attractions and        
the limitations of women like Daisy, who is modeled in many ways            
upon his wife Zelda.                                                        
  Gatsby worships Daisy, and Nick distrusts her- just as Scott both         
worshipped and distrusted Zelda. Gatsby loves Daisy too much to see         
what is wrong with her. Nick stands back and sees the way Daisy lets        
other people take care of her in crises. If you want to study the           
nature of Daisy's weakness, look especially at her behavior on the          
night before her wedding and on the night of Myrtle Wilson's death.         
Daisy, unlike Tom, uses her money rather than her body or her               
personality to bully others. She uses her money to protect her from         
reality, and when reality threatens to hurt her, she cries and goes         
inside the protective womb her money has made.                              
  Be careful not to identify Daisy with the green light at the end          
of her dock. The green light is the promise, the dream. Daisy               
herself is much less than that. Even Gatsby must realize that having        
Daisy in the flesh is much, much less than what he imagined it would        
be when he fell in love with the idea of her.                               
-                                                                           
  JORDAN BAKER                                                              
  Jordan Baker's most striking quality is her dishonesty. She is tough      
and aggressive- a tournament golfer who is so hardened by                   
competition that she is willing to do anything to win. At the end of        
Chapter IV, when Nick is telling us about Jordan, he remembers a story      
about her first major tournament. Apparently she moved her ball to          
improve her lie (!), but when the matter was being investigated, the        
caddy and the only other witness to the incident retracted their            
stories and nothing was proved against her. The incident should stay        
with you throughout the novel, reminding you (as it reminds Nick) that      
Jordan is the smart new woman, the opportunist who will do whatever         
she must to be successful in her world.                                     
  In many ways Jordan Baker symbolizes a new type of woman that was         
emerging in the Twenties. She is hard and self-sufficient, and she          
adopts whatever morals suit her situation. She has cut herself off          
from the older generation. She wears the kind of clothes that suit          
her; she smokes, she drinks, and has sex because she enjoys them.           
You may wish to explore Jordan as the new woman of the Twenties by          
looking at the manners and character traits she reveals. Note such          
things as her name (a masculine name), her body (hard, athletic,            
boyish, small-breasted), her style (blunt, cynical, bored), and her         
social background (she is cut off from past generations by having           
almost no family).                                                          
  Another important aspect of Jordan is her function in the novel.          
Fitzgerald needs her to get the story told. Because she is Daisy's          
friend from Louisville, she can supply Nick with information he             
would not have otherwise. She also serves as a link between the             
major characters, moving back and forth between the world of East           
Egg (Tom and Daisy's house) and West Egg (Gatsby's and Nick's houses).      
She is rich enough to be comfortable among the East Eggers but              
enough of a social hustler to appear at Gatsby's parties.                   
  Jordan serves still another purpose: Nick's girlfriend during the         
summer of 1922. The Nick-Jordan romance serves as a nice sub-plot to        
the Gatsby-Jordan relationship, and allows you to compare and contrast      
a romantic-idealistic love with a very practical relationship made          
on a temporary basis by two worldly people of the time.                     
  If you want to explore the Nick-Jordan relationship and the possible      
reasons why Nick becomes involved with her and then breaks the              
relationship off, you'll need to look particularly at three                 
passages: Nick's comments toward the end of Chapter III; the phone          
call between Nick and Jordan in Chapter VIII; and their final               
conversation in Chapter IX. We'll take a close look at these                
passages later on.                                                          
                                                                            
SETTING                                                                     
                            OTHER ELEMENTS                                  
-                                                                           
                               SETTING                      (FGRESETT)      
-                                                                           
  The setting in The Great Gatsby is very important because in              
Fitzgerald's world setting reveals character. Fitzgerald divides the        
world of the novel into four major settings: 1. East Egg; 2. West Egg;      
3. the valley of ashes; and 4. New York City. Within these major            
settings are two or more subsettings. East Egg is limited to Daisy's        
house, but West Egg incorporates both Gatsby's house and Nick's. The        
valley of ashes includes the Wilson's garage, Michaelis' restaurant,        
and the famous sign with the eyes of Dr. T. J. Eckleburg. New York          
City includes the offices where people work, the apartment Tom              
Buchanan has rented for Myrtle Wilson, and the Plaza Hotel, where           
the final showdown between Gatsby and Tom Buchanan takes place.             
  Each of these settings both reflects and determines the values of         
the people who live or work there. East Egg, where Tom and Daisy live,      
is the home of the Ivy League set who have had wealth for a long            
time and are comfortable with it. Since they are secure with their          
money, they have no need to show it off. Nick lives in new-rich West        
Egg because he is too poor to afford a home in East Egg; Gatsby             
lives there because his money is "new" and he lacks the social              
credentials to be accepted in East Egg. His house, like the rest of         
his possessions (his pink suit, for example), is tasteless and              
vulgar and would be completely out of place in the more refined and         
understated world of East Egg. No wonder that Gatsby is ruined in           
the end by the East, and that Nick decides to leave.                        
  The valley of ashes in contrast to both eggs is where the poor            
people live- those who are the victims of the rich. It is                   
characterized literally by dust, for it is here that the city's             
ashes are dumped (in what is now Flushing, Queens), and the                 
inhabitants are, as it were, symbolically dumped on by the rest of the      
world. The valley of ashes, with its brooding eyes of Dr. T. J.             
Eckleburg, also stands as a symbol of the spiritual dryness, the            
emptiness of the world of the novel.                                        
  New York City is a symbol of what America has become in the 1920s: a      
place where anything goes, where money is made and bootleggers              
flourish, and where the World Series can be fixed by a man like             
Meyer Wolfsheim. New York is a place of parties and affairs, and            
bizarre and colorful characters who appear from time to time in West        
Egg at Gatsby's parties.                                                    
  The idea of setting as moral geography is reinforced by the               
overriding symbolism of the American East and the American Midwest.         
This larger contrast between East and Midwest frames the novel as a         
whole. Nick comes East to enter the bond business, and finds himself        
instead in the dizzying world of The Jazz Age in the summer of 1922.        
He is fascinated and disgusted with this world, and he eventually           
returns home to the Midwest, to the values and traditions of his            
youth.                                                                      
                                                                            
THEMES                                                                      
                                THEMES                      (FGRETHEM)      
-                                                                           
  A good novel has a number of themes. The following are important          
themes of The Great Gatsby.                                                 
-                                                                           
  1. THE CORRUPTION OF THE AMERICAN DREAM                                   
  The American Dream- as it arose in the Colonial period and developed      
in the nineteenth century- was based on the assumption that each            
person, no matter what his origins, could succeed in life on the            
sole basis of his or her own skill and effort. The dream was                
embodied in the ideal of the self-made man, just as it was embodied in      
Fitzgerald's own family by his grandfather, P. F. McQuillan.                
  The Great Gatsby is a novel about what happened to the American           
dream in the 1920s, a period when the old values that gave substance        
to the dream had been corrupted by the vulgar pursuit of wealth. The        
characters are Midwesterners who have come East in pursuit of this new      
dream of money, fame, success, glamour, and excitement. Tom and             
Daisy must have a huge house, a stable of polo ponies, and friends          
in Europe. Gatsby must have his enormous mansion before he can feel         
confident enough to try to win Daisy.                                       
  What Fitzgerald seems to be criticizing in The Great Gatsby is not        
the American Dream itself but the corruption of the American Dream.         
What was once- for Ben Franklin, for example, or Thomas Jefferson- a        
belief in self-reliance and hard work has become what Nick Carraway         
calls "...the service of a vast, vulgar, and meretricious beauty." The      
energy that might have gone into the pursuit of noble goals has been        
channeled into the pursuit of power and pleasure, and a very showy,         
but fundamentally empty form of success.                                    
  How is this developed? I have tried to indicate in the                    
chapter-by-chapter analysis, especially in the Notes, that                  
Fitzgerald's critique of the dream of success is developed primarily        
through the five central characters and through certain dominant            
images and symbols. The characters might be divided into three groups:      
1. Nick, the observer and commentator, who sees what has gone wrong;        
2. Gatsby, who lives the dream purely; and 3. Tom, Daisy, and               
Jordan, the "foul dust" who are the prime examples of the corruption        
of the dream.                                                               
  The primary images and symbols that Fitzgerald employs in developing      
the theme are: 1. the green light; 2. the eyes of Dr. T. J. Eckleburg;      
3. the image of the East and Midwest; 4. Owl Eyes; 5. Dan Cody's            
yacht; and 6. religious terms such as grail and incarnation.                
-                                                                           
  2. SIGHT AND INSIGHT                                                      
  Both the character groupings and the images and symbols suggest a         
second major theme that we can call "sight and insight." As you read        
the novel, you will come across many images of blindness; is this           
because hardly anyone seems to see what is really going on? The             
characters have little self-knowledge and even less knowledge of            
each other. Even Gatsby- we might say, especially Gatsby- lacks the         
insight to understand what is happening. He never truly sees either         
Daisy or himself, so blinded is he by his dream. The only characters        
who see, in the sense of "understand," are Nick and Owl Eyes. The ever      
present eyes of Dr. Eckleburg seem to reinforce the theme that there        
is no all-seeing presence in the modern world.                              
-                                                                           
  3. THE MEANING OF THE PAST                                                
  The past is of central importance in the novel, whether it is             
Gatsby's personal past (his affair with Daisy in 1917) or the larger        
historical past to which Nick refers in the closing sentence of the         
novel: "So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back                
ceaselessly into the past." The past holds something that both              
Gatsby and Nick seem to long for: a simpler, better, nobler time,           
perhaps, a time when people believed in the importance of the family        
and the church. Tom, Daisy and Jordan are creatures of the present-         
Fitzgerald tells us little or nothing about their pasts- and it is          
this allegiance to the moment that makes them so attractive, and            
also so rootless and spiritually empty.                                     
-                                                                           
  4. THE EDUCATION OF A YOUNG MAN                                           
  In Chapter VII, Nick remembers that it is his thirtieth birthday.         
He, like Gatsby, Tom, and Daisy, came East to get away from his             
past; now that his youth is officially over, he realizes that he may        
have made a mistake to come East, and begins a period of                    
reevaluation that leads to his eventual decision to return to the           
Middle West.                                                                
  The Great Gatsby is the story of Nick's initiation into life. His         
trip East gives him the education he needs to grow up. The novel            
can, therefore, be called a bildungsroman- the German word for a story      
about a young man. (Other examples of a bildungsroman are The Red           
Badge of Courage, David Copperfield, and The Catcher in the Rye.)           
Nick, in a sense, writes The Great Gatsby to show us what he has            
learned.                                                                    
                                                                            
STYLE                                                                       
                                STYLE                       (FGRESTYL)      
-                                                                           
  Style refers to the way a writer puts words together: the length and      
rhythm of his sentences; his use of figurative language and symbolism;      
his use of dialogue and description.                                        
  Fitzgerald called The Great Gatsby a "novel of selected incident,"        
modelled after Flaubert's Madame Bovary. "What I cut out of it both         
physically and emotionally would make another novel," he said.              
Fitzgerald's stylistic method is to let a part stand for the whole. In      
Chapters I to III, for example, he lets three parties stand for the         
whole summer and for the contrasting values of three different worlds.      
He also lets small snatches of dialogue represent what is happening at      
each party. The technique is cinematic. The camera zooms in, gives          
us a snatch of conversation, and then cuts to another group of people.      
Nick serves almost as a recording device, jotting down what he              
hears. Fitzgerald's ear for dialogue, especially for the colloquial         
phrases of the period, is excellent.                                        
  Fitzgerald's style might also be called imagistic. His language is        
full of images- concrete verbal pictures appealing to the senses.           
There is water imagery in descriptions of the rain, Long Island Sound,      
and the swimming pool. There is religious imagery in the Godlike            
eyes of Dr. Eckleburg and in words such as incarnation, and grail.          
There is color imagery: pink for Gatsby, yellow and white for Daisy.        
  Some images might more properly be called symbols for the way they        
point beyond themselves to historic or mythic truths: the green             
light at the end of Daisy's dock, for instance, or Dr. Eckleburg's          
eyes, or Dan Cody's yacht. Through the symbolic use of images,              
Fitzgerald transforms what is on the surface a realistic social             
novel of the 1920s into a myth about America.                               
  Finally, we might call Fitzgerald's style reflective. There are           
several important passages at which Nick stops and reflects on the          
meaning of the action, almost interpreting the events. The style in         
such passages is dense, intellectual, almost deliberately difficult as      
Nick tries to wrestle with the meanings behind the events he has            
witnessed.                                                                  
                                                                            
VIEW                                                                        
                            POINT OF VIEW                   (FGREVIEW)      
-                                                                           
  Style and point of view are very hard to separate in a novel that is      
told in the first person by a narrator who is also one of the               
characters. The voice is always Nick's. Fitzgerald's choice of Nick as      
the  character through whom to tell his story has a stroke of               
genius. He had been reading Joseph Conrad and had been particularly         
struck by the way in which Conrad uses the character of Marlow to tell      
both the story of Kurtz in Heart of Darkness and the story of Jim in        
Lord Jim. In those novels, Fitzgerald learned, we never see the             
characters of Kurtz or Jim directly, but only through the eyes of           
other people. And when we come to think of it, isn't that how we get        
to know people in real life? We never get to know them all at once, as      
we get to know characters described by an omniscient novelist; we           
learn about them in bits and pieces over a period of time. And so,          
Fitzgerald reasoned, someone like Gatsby would be much more                 
understandable and sympathetic if presented through the eyes of a           
character like ourselves. Rather than imposing himself between us           
and the action, Nick brings us closer to the action by forcing us to        
experience events as though we were Nick. The I of the novel becomes        
ourselves, and we find ourselves, like Nick, wondering who Gatsby           
is, why he gives these huge parties, and what his past and                  
background may be. By writing from Nick's point of view, Fitzgerald is      
able to make Gatsby more realistic than he could have by presenting         
Gatsby through the eyes of an omniscient narrator. He is also able          
to make Gatsby a more sympathetic character because of Nick's decision      
to become Gatsby's friend. We want to find out more about Gatsby            
because Nick does. We care about Gatsby because Nick does. We are           
angry that no one comes to Gatsby's funeral because Nick is.                
  The use of the limited first person point of view gives not only the      
character of Gatsby but the whole novel a greater air of realism. We        
believe these parties really happened because a real person named Nick      
Carraway is reporting what he saw. When Nick writes down the names          
of the people who came to Gatsby's parties on a Long Island Railroad        
timetable, we believe that these people actually came to Gatsby's           
parties.                                                                    
  Nick is careful throughout the novel never to tell us things that he      
could not have known. If he was not present at a particular                 
occasion, he gets the information from someone who was- from Jordan         
Baker, for example, who tells him about Gatsby's courtship of Daisy in      
Louisville; or from the Greek, Michaelis, who tells him about the           
death of Myrtle Wilson. Sometimes Nick summarizes what others tell          
him, and sometimes he uses their words. But he never tells us               
something he could never know. This is one of the reasons the novel is      
so convincing.                                                              
                                                                            
FORM                                                                        
                          FORM AND STRUCTURE                (FGREFORM)      
-                                                                           
  Form and structure are closely related to point of view. Before           
writing a novel, an author has to ask himself: who is to tell the           
story? And in what order will events be told? The primary problem in        
answering the second question is how to handle time. Do I tell the          
story straight through from beginning to end? Do I start in the middle      
and use flashbacks?                                                         
  As many critics have pointed out, the method Fitzgerald adopts in         
The Great Gatsby is a brilliant one. He starts the novel in the             
present, giving us, in the first three chapters, a glimpse of the four      
main locales of the novel: Daisy's house in East Egg (Chapter I);           
the valley of ashes and New York (Chapter II); and Gatsby's house in        
West Egg (Chapter III). Having established the characters and               
setting in the first three chapters, he then narrates the main              
events of the story in Chapters IV to IX, using Chapters IV, VI, and        
VII to gradually reveal the story of Gatsby's past. The past and            
present come together at the end of the novel in Chapter IX.                
  The critic James E. Miller, Jr., diagrams the sequence of events          
in The Great Gatsby like this: "Allowing X to stand for the straight        
chronological account of the summer of 1922, and A, B, C, D, and F          
to represent the significant events of Gatsby's past, the nine              
chapters of The Great Gatsby may be charted: X, X, X, XCX, X, XBXCX,        
X, XCXDXD, XEXAX."                                                          
  Miller's diagram shows clearly how Fitzgerald designed the novel. He      
gives us the information as Nick gets it, just as we might find out         
information about a friend or acquaintance in real life, in bits and        
pieces over a period of time. Since we don't want or can't absorb much      
information about a character until we truly become interested in him,      
Fitzgerald waits to take us into the past until close to the middle of      
the novel. As the story moves toward its climax, we find out more           
and more about the central figure from Nick until we, too, are in a         
privileged position and can understand why Gatsby behaves as he does.       
  Thus the key to the structure of the novel is the combination of the      
first person narrative and the gradual revelation of the past as the        
narrator finds out more and more. The two devices work extremely            
effectively together, but neither would work very well alone.               
  Note that the material included in the novel is highly selective.         
Fitzgerald creates a series of scenes- most of them parties- but            
does not tell us much about what happens between these scenes. Think        
of how much happened in the summer of 1922 that Fitzgerald doesn't          
tell us! He doesn't tell us about Gatsby and Daisy's relationship           
after they meet at Nick's house in Chapter V, because Nick would            
have no access to this information. What the technique of extreme           
selectivity demands from the reader is close attention. We have to          
piece together everything we know about Gatsby from the few details         
that Nick gives us. Part of the pleasure this form gives us is that of      
drawing conclusions not only from what is included but from what is         
left out.                                                                   
                                                                            
CHAPTER_I                                                                   
                              THE STORY                     (FGRESTOR)      
-                                                                           
                              CHAPTER I                                     
-                                                                           
  The opening paragraphs teach us a lot about Nick and his attitude         
toward Gatsby and others. Nick introduces himself to us as a young man      
from the Midwest who has come East to learn the bond business. He           
tells us that he's tolerant, inclined to reserve judgment about             
people, and a good listener. People tell him their secrets because          
they trust him; he knows the Story of Gatsby.                               
  If you read closely, you'll see that Nick has ambivalent feelings         
toward Gatsby. He both loves Gatsby and is critical of him. Nick is         
tolerant, but that toleration has limits. He hates Gatsby's crass           
and vulgar materialism, but he also admires the man for his dream, his      
"romantic readiness," his "extraordinary gift for hope."                    
  Nick makes the distinction between Gatsby, whom he loves because          
of his dream, and the other characters, who constitute the "foul dust"      
that "floated in the wake of his dreams." Nick has such scorn for           
these "Eastern" types that he has left the East, returned to the            
Midwest, and, for the time being at least, withdraws from his               
involvement with other people.                                              
  Having told us about his relationships, Nick now introduces us to         
the world in which he lived during the summer of 1999: the world of         
East Egg and West Egg, Long Island.                                         
  Fitzgerald designed The Great Gatsby very carefully, establishing         
each of the locations in the novel as a symbol for a particular             
style of life. West Egg, where Nick and Gatsby live, is essentially         
a place for the nouveau riche. There are two types of people living         
here: those on the way up the social ladder who have not the family         
background or the money to live in fashionable East Egg; and those          
like Gatsby, whose vulgar display of wealth and connections with            
Broadway or the New York underworld make them unwelcome in the more         
dignified world of East Egg. Nick describes his own house as an             
eyesore, but it is a smaller eyesore than Gatsby's mansion, which           
has a tower on one side, "spanking new under a thin beard of raw ivy."      
Words like new, thin, and raw describe some of the reasons Gatsby's         
house is a monstrosity.                                                     
  By contrast, East Egg is like a fairyland. Its primary color is           
white, and Nick calls its houses "white palaces" that glitter in the        
sunlight. The story actually opens in East Egg on the night Nick            
drives over to have dinner with Tom and Daisy Buchanan. Since Daisy is      
his cousin and Tom, a friend from Yale, Nick has the credentials to         
visit East Egg. Their house is "a cheerful red-and-white Georgian           
Colonial Mansion" overlooking the bay. And the owner is obviously           
proud of his possessions.                                                   
  Our first view of Tom Buchanan reveals a very powerful man                
standing in riding clothes with his legs apart on his front porch.          
He likes his power, and like the potentates of Eastern kingdoms, he         
expects the obedience of his subjects. We are ushered into the              
living room with its "frosted wedding cake" ceiling, its                    
wine-colored rug, and its enormous couch on which are seated two            
princesses in white: Jordan Baker and Tom's wife, Daisy Buchanan.           
Fitzgerald controls the whole scene through his use of colors- white        
and gold mainly- that suggest a combination of beauty and wealth.           
Yet underneath this magical surface there is something wrong. Jordan        
Baker is bored and discontented. She yawns more than once in this very      
first scene. There is something cool and slightly unpleasant about the      
atmosphere- something basically disturbing. Tom talks about a book          
he has read, The Rise of the Colored Empires by Goddard. It is a piece      
of pure Social Darwinism, advocating that the white race preserve           
its own purity and beat down the colored races before they rise up and      
overcome the whites. Daisy, who seems not to understand what Tom is         
talking about, teases him about his size and about the big words in         
the book. The telephone rings, and Tom is called from the room to           
answer it. When Daisy follows him out, Jordan Baker confides to Nick        
that the call is from Tom's woman in New York.                              
  The rest of the evening is awkward and painful as Tom and Daisy           
try unsuccessfully to forget the intrusion. Daisy's cynicism about          
life becomes painfully clear when she says about her daughter's birth:      
"'I'm glad it's a girl. And I hope she'll be a fool- that's the best        
thing a girl can be in this world, a beautiful little fool.'"               
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
 NOTE: Under the veneer of the white world, there is hollowness.            
Nick has said at the very beginning that "Gatsby turned out all             
right at the end; it is what preyed on Gatsby, what foul dust               
floated in the wake of his dreams that temporarily closed out my            
interest in the abortive sorrows and short-winded elations of men."         
Even in this opening chapter, we are getting hints that Tom and             
Daisy are part of this foul dust.                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  In Nick's eyes, Tom and Daisy belong to "a rather distinguished           
secret society," whose members have powers the outside world can            
neither understand nor control. Nick finds both of them smug and            
insincere.                                                                  
  The evening ends early, around ten o'clock. Jordan Baker, a               
competitive golfer, wants to go to bed since she's playing in a             
tournament the next day. Before Nick leaves for West Egg, Tom and           
Daisy hint that they would welcome his attention to Miss Baker              
during the summer.                                                          
  Nick arrives home, and (in the final paragraph of the chapter)            
gets his first glimpse of Gatsby. Gatsby is standing on the lawn,           
stretching out "his arms toward the dark water in a curious way."           
Nick, from his own house, believes that he can see Gatsby trembling.        
As Nick looks out at the water, he can see "...nothing except a single      
green light, minute and far away, that might have been the end of a         
dock."                                                                      
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: THE GREEN LIGHT AS SYMBOL  This is the first use of one of the      
novel's central symbols, the green light at the end of Daisy's dock.        
What Fitzgerald seems to be doing is merely introducing a symbol            
that will gain in meaning as the story progresses. At this point, we        
don't even know that the light is on Daisy's dock, and we have no           
reason to associate Gatsby with Daisy. What we do know- and this is         
very important- is that Nick admires Gatsby because of his dream and        
this dream is somehow associated with the green light. The color green      
is a traditional symbol of spring and hope and youth. As long as            
Gatsby gazes at the green light, his dream lives.                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
                                                                            
CHAPTER_II                                                                  
                              CHAPTER II                                    
-                                                                           
  The opening description of the valley of ashes, watched over by           
the brooding eyes of Dr. T. J. Eckleburg, has been analyzed again           
and again. Fitzgerald's friend and editor, Maxwell Perkins, wrote to        
Scott on November 20, 1924: "In the eyes of Dr. Eckleburg various           
readers will see different significances; but their presence gives a        
superb touch to the whole thing: great unblinking eyes,                     
expressionless, looking down upon the human scene. It's                     
magnificent." Later in the same letter Perkins concludes, "...with the      
help of T. J. Eckleburg... you have imported a sort of sense of             
eternity."                                                                  
  How should you approach this famous symbol? Remember, a wide variety      
of interpretations have been made and defended over the years.              
  It's best to begin by placing Eckleburg in his geographical context:      
the valley of ashes, located about halfway between West Egg and New         
York City. The valley of ashes is the home of George and Myrtle             
Wilson, whom we'll meet later on in this chapter. The valley is also a      
very important part of what we might call the moral geography of the        
novel. Values are associated with places. In Chapter I we were              
introduced to East and West Egg, the homes of the very rich, the            
nouveau riche, and the middle class. The valley of ashes is the home        
of the poor, the victims of those who live in either New York or the        
Eggs. Men, described by Fitzgerald as "ash-gray," move through the          
landscape "dimly and already crumbling through the powdery air."            
  Apparently the city's ashes are dumped in the valley, and the men         
who work here have the job of shoveling up these ashes with "leaden         
spades."                                                                    
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: On a more symbolic level, these men are inhabitants of what         
might be called Fitzgerald's wasteland. T. S. Eliot's famous poem "The      
Waste Land" had been published in 1922, and Fitzgerald had read it          
with great interest. There is no doubt that he had Eliot's poem in          
mind when he described the valley of ashes. Eliot's wasteland- arid,        
desertlike- contains figures who go through the motions of life with        
no spiritual center. Eliot's imagery seemed to express the anxiety,         
frustration, and emptiness of a post-war generation cut off from            
spiritual values by the shock of the First World War.                       
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Read the following passage carefully:                                     
-                                                                           
  The eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg are blue and gigantic- their           
retinas are one yard high. They look out of no face, but, instead,          
from a pair of enormous yellow spectacles which pass over a                 
non-existent nose. Evidently some wild wag of an oculist set them           
there to fatten his practice in the borough of Queens, and then sank        
down himself into eternal blindness, or forgot them and moved away.         
But his eyes, dimmed a little by many paintless days under sun and          
rain, brood on over the solemn dumping ground.                              
-                                                                           
  Some readers interpret this passage as a description of the god of        
the modern world- the god of the wasteland. Keep this description in        
mind in Chapter VIII when the crazed and jealous Wilson looks at the        
giant eyes and says, "God sees everything." For now, early in               
Chapter II, it is still too early to make any kind of direct                
correlation between the eyes of Dr. Eckleburg and the eyes of God.          
At this point we have only hints: the size of the eyes, the missing         
face, the departure of the original creator of the sign, all of             
which transform the eyes into something mythic, something suggesting a      
superior being who no longer cares, who is no longer involved with the      
petty lives of the pathetic creatures below. The eyes "brood on over        
the solemn dumping ground," offering no help or solace to its               
inhabitants. The oculist has forgotten the eyes which he left               
behind, just as God has forgotten the inhabitants of the valley of          
ashes. Many interpretations are possible; you'll want to think about        
them as the novel develops.                                                 
  The action of the second chapter begins as Tom Buchanan brings            
Nick to George B. Wilson's garage. Both the garage and the all-night        
restaurant of the Greek Michaelis border the valley of ashes. Wilson's      
wife, Myrtle, is Tom's mistress. Pay close attention to these first         
descriptions of Wilson and his wife, and you'll learn a lot about           
who they are and what they stand for. Wilson is described as "a blond,      
spiritless man, anaemic, and faintly handsome." He is the embodiment        
of the valley of ashes: dead inside, a living ghost. The key words are      
spiritless and anaemic. He has no energy and no faith. He believes          
somehow that doing business with Tom will help him; but he understands      
neither the power nor the cruelty of the man he is dealing with.            
Myrtle Wilson is a sensuous woman in her middle thirties who has the        
energy her husband lacks. "There was an immediate perceptible vitality      
about her," says Nick. The fire inside her has drawn her to Tom             
Buchanan as a lover who can take her away from the gray and empty           
prison of the valley of ashes.                                              
  Note that Tom takes Myrtle to New York, the fourth major location in      
the moral geography of the novel. If the valley of ashes is the home        
of death-in-life- the place where the spiritless and downtrodden live-      
New York is the center of the corruption, or, more appropriately,           
the place where wealth, corruption, and self-gratification openly           
meet. Myrtle must ride into New York on the train in a separate car in      
deference to the "East Eggers." Why? Because it is important to keep        
up a facade of respectability. In New York, however, where anything is      
permitted, Tom can flaunt his relationship with Myrtle.                     
  The group goes to the apartment in Morningside Heights that Tom           
Buchanan has rented for his liaisons with Myrtle. What goes on there        
and how Nick reacts to what goes on tell us something very important        
about how Fitzgerald wants us to view New York.                             
  The party consists of Nick, Tom, Myrtle, Myrtle's sister                  
Catherine, and a couple named McKee who live downstairs. Nick is            
really more of an observer than a participant. He tells us that he has      
been drunk just twice in his life, and the second time was that             
afternoon. Whether he drinks in order to lose his self-control and          
join the others or simply to escape this disordered world is something      
you'll have to decide for yourself. Perhaps both interpretations are        
correct. In any case, all the guests at the party seem to have              
something unnatural or wrong with them. Catherine, the sister, has          
"a solid, sticky bob of red hair, and a complexion powdered milky           
white. Her eyebrows had been plucked and then drawn on again at a more      
rakish angle." Mr. McKee is a pale, feminine man who has just shaved        
and left a spot of lather on his cheek. His wife is "shrill,                
languid, handsome and horrible." Myrtle Wilson becomes more and more        
"violently affected moment by moment." The conversation is absurd           
and pretentious; everyone tries to impress each other, and lies flow        
as freely as the liquor.                                                    
  Nick tries to leave, part of him wants to be somewhere else, but          
part of him- that part that makes him the narrator of this novel- is        
fascinated by "the inexhaustible variety of life." He is both repelled      
and attracted toward these people. The appearance of Myrtle Wilson's        
new puppy, "groaning faintly," is like the entire scene, both funny         
and sad. Then a crisis erupts. Myrtle crudely insists that she can          
say, "Daisy!" any time she wants, and Tom Buchanan, making a short          
deft movement, breaks her nose with his open hand. So this is what          
happens to those who become entangled with the Buchanans! Tom, we see,      
is strong and brutal and absolutely selfish. He is perfectly happy          
to enjoy Myrtle in bed, but at other times she must know when to            
keep her place. For challenging the purity of his Daisy, she is             
punished. Later, in Chapter VII during the second New York party,           
we'll see what happens when Gatsby tries to cross Tom Buchanan.             
  In two chapters, Fitzgerald has shown us two different symbolic           
landscapes: one, a dinner party in East Egg with Daisy, Jordan, Tom         
and Nick; the other, a drunken brawl in New York with Tom, Nick,            
Myrtle, Catherine and the McKees. The contrast between the two parties      
tells us much about these two worlds and about the people who               
inhabit them. Now to complete his introduction to the world of the          
novel, Fitzgerald gives us in Chapter III a third party- at the West        
Egg Home of Jay Gatsby.                                                     
                                                                            
CHAPTER_III                                                                 
                             CHAPTER III                                    
-                                                                           
  Though the novel is called The Great Gatsby, we have neither seen         
Gatsby (except for a glimpse of him at the end of Chapter I) nor            
been given any idea of why he should be called "Great." Fitzgerald's        
method is to introduce Gatsby to us gradually, as a kind of mystery to      
be solved. We see Gatsby first through the eyes of others. Catherine        
Wilson told Nick (in Chapter II) that she had heard that Gatsby was         
a nephew or a cousin of Kaiser Wilhelm's. Lucille, a friend of              
Jordan Baker, thinks that Gatsby was a German spy during the war. A         
man sitting nearby agrees with her. The world is full of rumors             
about Gatsby because no one really knows who he is, where his money         
comes from, and why he gives these magnificent parties every                
weekend. Our job as readers is to separate fact from rumor and to           
discover, with Nick, who Gatsby really is and why he behaves the way        
he does. Our job will be to probe behind the vulgar, violent surface        
of his world to reveal the man beneath. We are able to do that- as          
in real life- only gradually, for it is never possible to know someone      
all at once. The process begins in Chapter III with a portrait of           
the public Gatsby, seen through the eyes of his guests. It's not until      
Chapter IV that we'll begin to discover the man beneath.                    
  Brightness, confusion, magnificence, daring, vulgarity, excess,           
excitement- these are the words that describe Gatsby's parties. They        
also describe one side of life in America during the 1920s, in the          
years before the Great Depression. Gatsby has a Rolls, a station            
wagon, two motor boats, aquaplanes, a swimming pool, and a real beach.      
People come to his parties and use these things. Everything is real.        
Crates of oranges and lemons are delivered to his door. Beneath canvas      
tents in the garden are buffet tables glittering with spiced hams           
and turkeys "bewitched to a dark gold." Gatsby's bar is stocked with        
gin, liquors, and "cordials so long forgotten that most of his              
female guests were too young to know one from another." The world of        
Gatsby's parties has an aura of magic about it- not the magic of            
East Egg, with its fairytale imagery of princesses in ivory towers,         
but the magic of the amusement park, with the promise of fast rides         
and expensive prizes. Gatsby's world is a world of infinite hope and        
possibility. Young girls with laughter like gold wait for the right         
man. Middle-aged women, tired of their husbands, search for lovers.         
And ambitious men search for the right contact that will bring them         
instant fame and fortune.                                                   
  Nobody knows the host. Nick is "one of the few guests who had             
actually been invited." Fitzgerald builds suspense by making us wonder      
when we'll meet Gatsby and what he'll be like when we do. Nick runs         
into Jordan Baker and the twins, who talk about Gatsby, but have            
only false information about him. Nick and Jordan go off in search          
of Gatsby, but discover Owl Eyes instead.                                   
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: OWL EYES  Owl Eyes is "a stout middle-aged man, with                
enormous owl-eyed spectacles." He is overwhelmed by the fact that           
Gatsby's Gothic library is stocked not with the fake, cardboard             
backs of hooks, but with the works themselves. He knows that Gatsby         
has never read the books, however, because the pages have never been        
cut. "'This fella's a regular Belasco,'" Owl Eves tells Nick and            
Jordan. "'It's a triumph.... Knew when to stop, too- didn't cut the         
pages.'"                                                                    
  The reference to David Belasco, the great                                 
playwright-producer-director of realistic plays, is not accidental.         
Owl Eyes, as Nick refers to him, is the first to realize the                
essentially theatrical quality of Gatsby's world. Just as Belasco           
was a technician who wanted to get everything right, so Gatsby              
spares no expense to build the material world necessary to fulfill his      
dream. He has created an extraordinary stage set complete with real         
books. Owl Eyes, as his name suggests, is one of the few to really see      
and, in some way, understand Gatsby.                                        
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Nick and Jordan go back outside to watch the entertainment at             
midnight. Even the moon cooperates, floating over Long Island sound         
like the cardboard moon on a stage set. In a scene that Nick calls          
"significant, elemental, profound," Gatsby appears:                         
-                                                                           
  "I'm Gatsby," he said suddenly.                                           
  "What!" I exclaimed. "Oh, I be your pardon."                              
  "I thought you knew, old sport. I'm afraid I'm not a very good            
host."                                                                      
  He smiled understandingly- much more than understandingly. It was         
one of those rare smiles with a quality of eternal reassurance in           
it, that you may come across four or five times in life. It faced-          
or seemed to face- the whole external world for an instant, and then        
concentrated on you with an irresistible prejudice in your favor. It        
understood you just as far as you wanted to be understood, believed in      
you as you would like to believe in yourself, and assured you that          
it had precisely the impression of you that, at your best, you hoped        
to convey. Precisely at that point it vanished- and I was looking at        
an elegant young roughneck, a year or two over thirty, whose elaborate      
formality of speech just missed being absurd.                               
-                                                                           
  Gatsby is a series of paradoxes. He is both a "roughneck" and one         
who practices "elaborate formality in speech." He calls people "old         
sport," apparently a habit picked up at Oxford, though at this point        
we're still uncertain whether Oxford is just part of the myth. Has          
he really gone to Oxford? We, like Jordan Baker, may not believe it.        
But then why is he picking his words with care? And how did he earn         
the money to give these parties? As Nick points out: people don't just      
"drift cooly out of nowhere and buy a palace on Long Island Sound."         
A millionaire who gives parties conjures up an image of a "florid           
and corpulent person in his middle years." But Gatsby is none of            
these.                                                                      
  Gatsby is- quite simply- not like anyone else in the world of the         
novel. Young, handsome, excessively polite, he seems not to belong          
to the world he has created. His smile radiates an inner warmth that        
his guests don't have. Nick alone senses it. "Anyway, he gives large        
parties," says Jordan Baker, because the party, not Gatsby, is what         
interests her. But now Nick watches Gatsby as much as he watches the        
party. He notices Gatsby standing "alone on the steps and looking from      
one group to another with approving eyes." Here Gatsby is like a            
director admiring his play or a religious leader blessing his               
disciples. He alone is not drinking. As the party grows more frenzied,      
he becomes increasingly separate from it. He is untouched by the            
corruption of the world.                                                    
  The party goes on. People become more drunk and irritable.                
Husbands and wives fight over whether to stay or leave. Some wives are      
lifted, kicking into their cars. Gatsby goes to answer a telephone          
call from Philadelphia at 2 A.M. As Nick leaves to walk home, he            
encounters Owl Eves, who is unable to get his car out of the ditch.         
Neither Owl Eyes nor the car's driver- "a pale, dangling                    
individual"- seems to be able to manage. Nick returns to his own home,      
leaving the guests to struggle with their problem.                          
  Nick shifts the focus of the chapter from Gatsby back to himself. He      
wants us to know that he's done more with his summer than go to             
parties. To correct that false impression, he tells us how he               
usually occupies his time. As he tells us about his work, his walks         
through New York City, and his fascination for women, he gives us a         
sense that, in some way he is as hollow as the characters he                
describes. He seems to need adventure as an escape from loneliness,         
and perhaps that is what draws him to Jordan Baker. He is also              
sexually attracted to her. He became involved with Jordan around            
midsummer, he tells us, after a short affair with a girl from Jersey        
City. He knows that Jordan is dishonest- she cheated in her first golf      
tournament by moving her ball to improve her lie. Whatever Nick's           
reason for being with her, we're made to feel that somehow Jordan is        
not the kind of woman Nick ought to like.                                   
  At the end of the chapter Nick says, "Every one suspects himself          
of at least one of the cardinal virtues, and this is mine; I am one of      
the few honest people that I have ever known." This is one of the most      
talked about lines in the novel, and it is a hard one to interpret,         
coming as it does right after Nick's statement that "dishonesty in a        
woman is a thing you never blame deeply." Is Nick using a double            
standard, arguing that it's all right for women to be dishonest             
because they can't help it? How do we reconcile our view of Nick as         
a reliable and sympathetic narrator when he allows himself to get           
involved with such a morally unattractive woman? These are questions        
raised by the troubling last pages of this chapter- questions that are      
answered in a variety of ways by different readers. If you want to          
question Nick's judgment, you can certainly find evidence to support        
that point of view. Yet most readers have not been too hard on Nick         
for his relationship with Jordan. The question is very much an open         
one.                                                                        
                                                                            
CHAPTER_IV                                                                  
                              CHAPTER IV                                    
-                                                                           
  One of the extraordinary things about The Great Gatsby is that the        
action of the novel (call it the plot, if you want) doesn't start           
until Chapter IV. We have had three parties, and we have been               
introduced to all the major characters. Finally, we are allowed to          
find out why they have been brought together and what the nature of         
the story is in which they all share. But before Fitzgerald begins          
that story, he has one more set of details to give us: a list of the        
people who came to Gatsby's parties during the summer of 1922.              
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: THE GUESTS AT GATSBY'S PARTIES  Why does Fitzgerald give us         
a list of guests nearly three pages long? Perhaps he wants to lend          
an air of reality to the parties by listing the guests as they would        
appear in a newspaper report. The names seem to come from social            
registers, movie magazines, businessmen's directories, and club             
rosters. Names, as you know, can reveal many things about a person,         
such as his religion, his ethnic background, and his social class.          
Judging by Fitzgerald's list, just about every type of person is            
represented at Gatsby's parties. Names like Flink, Hammerhead, Beluga,      
Muldoon, Gulick, Fishguard, and Snell suggest humorously that many          
of these people have no backgrounds at all but belong to a vast vulgar      
crowd of self-made men, all hungering for success. Fitzgerald's long        
list of names also makes fun of a technique used in epics such as           
The Iliad and The Odyssey. In these heroic poems, we are given lists        
of warriors. In The Great Gatsby we are given lists of guests at            
parties. Our world of knights and ladies has become much smaller and        
much less noble.                                                            
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  The story continues with Gatsby driving Nick to New York for              
lunch. Gatsby has decided to use this trip to tell Nick something           
about himself. Our first reaction, like Nick's, is one of disbelief.        
Gatsby's words are so full of lies that it's difficult to know whether      
anything he says is true. He tells Nick that he's the son of wealthy        
people in the Midwest, "all dead now." He claims to have been educated      
at Oxford. When Nick asks him where in the Midwest he's from, Gatsby        
answers, "San Francisco." The lie is so blatant that we don't know          
what to make of it. Neither does Nick. Gatsby continues to describe         
his life as that of a "young rajah in all the capitals of Europe,"          
collecting jewels, hunting for big game. Then he speaks of his war          
experience, his heroism, and the medals he was awarded by various           
European governments, "even Montenegro." At this point, when Nick is        
most incredulous, Gatsby produces from his pocket his medal from            
Montenegro and a picture of himself with cricket bat standing in the        
quad at one of the colleges at Oxford. There is thus a bizarre mixture      
of truth and fantasy in Gatsby's self-description, and we are forced        
both to hold him in awe and to reserve final judgment on him until          
we can find out more. The car carrying Nick and Gatsby to New York          
seems to fly- gliding through the valley of ashes, roaring through          
Astoria. A policeman stops them for speeding, but apologizes to Gatsby      
as soon as Gatsby shows him a white card. As the car enters New             
York, Nick is struck anew by the appropriateness of that city as a          
place for Gatsby, to do business. The suspense over Gatsby's true           
identity and purpose is sustained throughout the chapter, first at          
lunch, and then in the tea scene with Jordan Baker.                         
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: MEYER WOLFSHEIM  At lunch we are introduced to the business         
side of Gatsby in the person of Meyer Wolfsheim. Wolfsheim is               
modeled on the real-life figure of Arnold Rothstein, the man who            
helped fix the 1919 World Series. Through Wolfsheim, "a small               
flat-nosed Jew," we learn about Gatsby's connections with a shady           
underworld, and we begin to understand for the first time where             
Gatsby's money comes from. The discovery of Gatsby's unsavory business      
dealings may taint his dreams for you and make you question his             
"greatness." But you may also find that it lends him an air of mystery      
and romance.                                                                
  Wolfsheim is sentimental about friends but not about business-            
something we will learn again at the end of the novel. He mistakes          
Nick for one of Gatsby's business friends and asks him if he's looking      
for a "gonnegtion." But when he finds out that Nick is merely a             
personal friend, he changes the subject. Wolfsheim has neither              
education nor class. When Gatsby leaves the room for a phone call           
(Gatsby is always leaving rooms for important and mysterious phone          
calls), Wolfsheim tells Nick that Gatsby has gone to "Oggsford College      
in England." Oxford, as a point of fact, is a university; there is          
no Oxford College. Wolfsheim is so uncultured that he's impressed with      
Gatsby's breeding and considers Gatsby "the kind of man you'd like          
to take home and introduce to your mother and sister." He's so bad          
at judging other people that he describes Gatsby as someone who             
would never so much as look at another man's wife. Nothing says more        
about Wolfsheim's boorishness and his ruthless battle for money and         
power than the fact that he wears cuff links made of human molars. The      
scene is full of wonderful ironic touches such as this, which Nick          
simply relates without commenting on.                                       
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  From Jordan Baker, Nick learns about Gatsby and Daisy. She begins as      
though she were telling a fairytale. And indeed it is. The princess in      
this case is Daisy Fay, an eighteen-year-old beauty, the most               
popular girl in Louisville, Kentucky. All the officers from nearby          
Camp Taylor are competing for the honor of her company. On this             
particular day, she is sitting in her white dress in her white              
roadster (princesses must wear white) with a young lieutenant who is        
speaking to her with the kind of romantic intensity that princesses         
adore. His name is Jay Gatsby. Daisy apparently loves him as much as        
he adores her, for she's ready to go to New York to say good-bye to         
him when he's sent overseas. And even though she decides to marry           
Tom Buchanan, she drinks herself into a state of near stupor on the         
night before her wedding after having received a letter from Gatsby.        
  Jordan goes on to describe the three years of marriage: Daisy's           
devotion to Tom and Tom's affairs with a chambermaid in a Santa             
Barbara hotel. Since we already know that Tom is having an affair with      
Myrtle Wilson, it doesn't surprise us that Tom has been unfaithful          
before. What may surprise us is that Daisy seems to have been               
faithful. Is it because of Gatsby? Does she still love him? Has she         
thought about him during the five years between their time together in      
Louisville and the day that she hears his name on Jordan Baker's lips?      
As Jordan Baker describes it, Daisy has not given Gatsby a thought          
until the mention of his name jarred her memory. It's hard to say.          
  In the case of Gatsby, it's not hard to say at all. As Jordan             
explains, "'Gatsby bought that house so that Daisy would be just            
across the bay.'" And Nick responds in a moment of powerful                 
illumination: "Then it had not been merely the stars to which he had        
aspired on that June night. He came alive to me, delivered suddenly         
from the womb of his purposeless splendor."                                 
  What Nick realizes suddenly is that Gatsby's house and his lavish         
life-style are not an ostentatious display of wealth, but a                 
necessary means to the fulfillment of his dream. Until now Gatsby           
was a mystery, misunderstood by many, used by others, reviled as a          
criminal by still others. Now the truth is unveiled, and we can             
understand his desperate yearning for Daisy, and for everything-            
youth, love, and so on- that is symbolized by the green light at the        
end of dock.                                                                
  Jordan tells Nick that Gatsby had taken her aside at one of his           
parties and had asked her to ask Nick to ask Daisy to Nick's house for      
a meeting. This indirection was deliberate, for Gatsby was terrified        
of seeing Daisy again.                                                      
  Though Gatsby loves Daisy with an almost unbearable intensity, he         
doesn't want to offend her or Tom. He's afraid to ask Nick directly,        
so he uses Jordan as a go-between. Afraid, also, that Daisy will            
refuse to come to see him, Gatsby arranges for Nick to invite Daisy         
for tea and makes sure Daisy doesn't know he'll be there, too.              
Gatsby's elaborate plans show us just how long he has thought about         
this moment. His plans also reveal the heart of an innocent                 
romantic, a novice at love, who is obviously unused to dealing with         
women or with situations such as this. We are ready for the central         
chapter, where the actual meeting takes place.                              
                                                                            
CHAPTER_V                                                                   
                              CHAPTER V                                     
-                                                                           
  Nick arrives in West Egg to find all the lights in Gatsby's house         
blazing and Gatsby himself walking toward him across the lawn.              
Gatsby invites Nick to go to Coney Island. When Nick turns him down,        
Gatsby suggests a swim in the pool, which he hasn't used all summer.        
He never does use the pool until the very last day of his life- but         
that's getting ahead of ourselves.                                          
  Nick agrees to invite Daisy over. Gatsby suggests waiting a few days      
so that he can get Nick's grass cut. Then he offers Nick some money,        
not a free handout, but a "little business on the side." Here Nick's        
Midwestern sense of morality helps him make a decision, and he turns        
Gatsby down.                                                                
  The day arrives, and it is raining. (Rain in novels is not usually        
accidental. Notice, as you read this chapter, how the rain stops            
conveniently at just the right moment.) Gatsby is so nervous that he        
can hardly function. He has not slept. He is as pale as a high              
school boy on his first date. Life with Daisy in Louisville had been        
so wonderful five years before; now he is terrified that even should        
Daisy agree to renew their relationship, it won't be the same.              
  Daisy arrives looking absolutely beautiful in a three-cornered            
lavender hat, "with a bright, ecstatic smile." She is dying to know         
why Nick has invited her over. Nick takes Daisy inside, thinking            
that Gatsby is waiting for her, but the living room is empty.               
Gatsby, either unable to face the encounter or anxious to pretend that      
he has just dropped over, has gone out into the rain and walked around      
the house. Now he knocks on the front door. Nick opens it and sees          
Gatsby, "pale as death," standing in a puddle of water. Both his            
paleness and the rain reinforce our sense of his fear, his terrible         
insecurity, and his gloom. Gatsby goes into the living room, leaving        
Nick in the hall with us to imagine what the first moment must have         
been like. Apparently it was dreadful, because when Nick does come          
in the room he finds Gatsby in a state of nerves. Gatsby knocks over        
Nick's clock (some readers see this as a symbol of his attempt to stop      
time) and then catches it. The scene has an air of desperate comedy         
about it; it's funny and not funny at the same time. The characters         
try to get through tea, and they try to make conversation. When Nick        
excuses himself, Gatsby rushes into the hall after him, whispering,         
"This is a terrible mistake."                                               
  Nick sends Gatsby back and goes off by himself for half an hour.          
When Nick returns, the rain has stopped, the sun is out, and Daisy and      
Gatsby are radiantly happy. Fitzgerald's choice of words to describe        
Gatsby- "glowed," "new well-being," "radiated," "exultation"-               
suggest that Gatsby has come alive again. He has rediscovered his           
dream. He walks Daisy and Nick over to his house and shows them his         
possessions.                                                                
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: DAISY AND GATSBY'S SHIRTS  Suddenly in this scene the               
meaning of the novel's epigraph becomes clear: the four-line poem of        
Thomas Park d'Invilliers that Fitzgerald quotes on the title page           
describes exactly what Gatsby has done. He has symbolically worn the        
gold hat; he has bounced high, accumulating possessions for this            
moment, so that when Daisy sees them she will cry out, like the             
lover in the poem, "I must have you." And Daisy does. She admires           
the house, the gardens, the gigantic rooms, the colors of pink and          
lavender, the sunken baths. The princess is astounded. Gatsby               
overwhelms her with these tangible signs of his affection and when          
he takes his shirts, ordered from England, out of his cabinet and           
throws them on the bed, she bends her head into the shirts and              
begins to cry. "They're such beautiful shirts," she sobs. "It makes me      
sad because I've never seen such beautiful shirts before."                  
  It seems silly of course to cry over shirts. But it is not the            
shirts themselves that overwhelm her but what they symbolize: Gatsby's      
extraordinary dedication to his dream. Wouldn't you be moved to             
tears to find yourself the object of so much adoration?                     
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  In the next scene Gatsby tells Daisy about how he has watched the         
green light that burns at the end of her dock. For so long that             
light has been a symbol of his dream- of something he has wanted            
more than life itself. Gazing at it that night when Nick first saw          
him, and throughout the summer, Gatsby must have believed that if only      
he could have Daisy he would be happy for ever. Now suddenly he has         
her, the light is just a light again, and Nick wonders if this              
person could ever be as wonderful or as magical as Gatsby's idea of         
her. No matter what we think of Gatsby or of his dream, we are drawn        
to him by the sad knowledge that dreams themselves are often-               
perhaps always- more beautiful than dreams fulfilled.                       
  Nick realizes this, too, when he says: "There must have been moments      
even that afternoon when Daisy tumbled short of his dreams- not             
through her own fault, but because of the colossal vitality of his          
illusion. It had gone beyond her, beyond everything."                       
  Nick leaves the couple as dusk comes and the lights come on in            
West Egg. Klipspringer, "the boarder," is summoned from his room to         
play the piano. As he plays "Ain't We Got Fun?"- one of the most            
popular songs of the day- we sense a strange irony. What the song is        
describing is terribly different from what Gatsby and Daisy have at         
that moment. What they have is so much more than fun: it's                  
beautiful, more intense, and finally more painful. There is both a joy      
and sadness in a love as great as theirs. Klipspringer plays on,            
unaware of their feelings. Because Nick is aware, he is wise to             
leave them alone.                                                           
                                                                            
CHAPTER_VI                                                                  
                              CHAPTER VI                                    
-                                                                           
  This chapter is as important for what it doesn't do as for what it        
does. In a letter to his friend Edmund Wilson, Fitzgerald confessed         
about The Great Gatsby: "The worst fault in it, I think, is a BIG           
FAULT: I gave no account (and had no feeling about or knowledge of)         
the emotional relations between Gatsby and Daisy from the time of           
their reunion to the catastrophe." Now since the reunion takes place        
in Chapter V and the catastrophe, in Chapter VII, the logical place         
for this account is Chapter VI. Why doesn't it occur?                       
  One reason is that the novel is told in the first person by Nick,         
and he can describe only what he sees or what he is told by others.         
What happens between Gatsby and Daisy is private; Nick would have no        
knowledge of it.                                                            
  Another reason might be that Fitzgerald wants to emphasize not the        
actual relationship between Gatsby and Daisy, but Gatsby's dream,           
and therefore he decided to focus on the past rather than the present.      
That may explain why in Chapter VI Fitzgerald tells the story of            
Gatsby's life before he met Daisy- not all of it, but enough for us to      
begin to understand him.                                                    
  He was born James Gatz, the son of a North Dakota farmer. He had          
been sent to St. Olaf College, a small Lutheran school in Minnesota,        
but had left after two weeks, humiliated by the janitor's job he had        
been given to pay for his room and board. Having worked in the              
summer as a clam digger and salmon fisher on Lake Superior, he              
returned to find a job. It was a decision that changed his life. On         
Little Girl Bay one day he saw the yacht of copper millionaire Dan          
Cody in danger of being broken up by a storm, and rowed out to warn         
him. Cody was impressed by this boy, who called himself Jay Gatsby,         
and took him on as steward, mate, and later as skipper and personal         
secretary. In this way, Jay Gatsby was born.                                
  Why did he change his name? In one of the most difficult and              
important passages in the novel Nick tells us:                              
-                                                                           
  The truth was that Jay Gatsby of West Egg, Long Island, sprang            
from his Platonic conception of himself. He was a son of God- a phrase      
which, if it means anything, means just that- and he must be about His      
Father's business, the service of a vast, vulgar, and meretricious          
beauty. So he invented just the sort of Jay Gatsby that a                   
seventeen-year-old boy would be likely to invent, and to this               
conception he was faithful to the end.                                      
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: HIS PLATONIC CONCEPTION OF HIMSELF  As a boy Gatsby (still          
Gatz) had been a dreamer, and as he grew older, his dreams became more      
vivid. He dreamed, as many children do, of a bright, gaudy world where      
all his fantasies would be fulfilled. On the day that he saved Dan          
Cody's yacht, he must have seen an embodiment of everything he wanted.      
In a strange sort of way Gatsby never believed that he was just             
James Gatz. He had an idea of what he wanted to be. And just as             
Plato believed that our material bodies are not our real selves, but        
only physical images of our ideal or perfect selves. Gatsby had an          
image of himself, to which he gave the name Gatsby. From the day            
that he met Dan Cody he decided to dedicate his life to the                 
development of the idea of himself that existed in his head. And            
just as Jesus left his family to be about his heavenly Father's             
business, so Gatsby left his earthly parents to enter the service of        
his God- a "vast, vulgar, and meretricious beauty"- in this case            
symbolized by millionaire Dan Cody. Gatsby wanted of course not only        
to serve Cody but to be Dan Cody- one of those remarkable self-made         
men to come along in America between the 1890s and the years before         
World War I.                                                                
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Gatsby, sails with Cody to the West Indies and the Barbary Coast. He      
learns to avoid alcohol when he sees what it does to the older man,         
and he learns how wonderful the "good life" can be. He decides to           
devote himself to the pursuit of this life, but Cody dies and his           
mistress Ella Kaye uses some legal device to steal Gatsby's share of        
the inheritance. Young Gatsby is once again left penniless. But he has      
had his "education," and he knows what he wants to be.                      
  At this point Nick's narrative of Gatsby's youth breaks off               
(notice how we get the story of Gatsby's past in bits and pieces), and      
we return to the present. It is later in the summer and Nick hasn't         
seen Gatsby for several weeks. He drops by Gatsby's house and finds         
Tom Buchanan there. It's the first time these two have been                 
together, and the tension between them, though not as great as it will      
become, is already strong. Tom has been out riding with a Mr. and Mrs.      
Sloane. Gatsby invites them to stay for dinner. Mrs. Sloane, who is         
giving a dinner party herself, invites Nick and Gatsby to join them.        
Nick politely refuses, but Gatsby accepts- obviously a breach of            
etiquette, because the invitation was meant as a polite gesture, not        
as a real offer. Gatsby lacks the social grace to know this; he also        
wants to be with Daisy. Tom is offended by Gatsby's poor taste. He          
also doesn't like the idea that Daisy has been coming to Gatsby's           
house without him. "Women run around too much these days to suit            
me," he says. "They meet all kinds of crazy fish." Once again we see        
Tom's double standard (he can do anything he wants) and the snobbery        
of the East Eggers, who turn their noses up at someone as unrefined as      
Gatsby.                                                                     
  Even though he disapproves of Gatsby, Tom agrees to visit Gatsby's        
house the following Saturday night rather than let Daisy go there           
alone. The rest of Chapter VI describes a second evening at                 
Gatsby's, but this time seen through Daisy's eyes; and the mood is          
clearly very different from that of the party described in Chapter          
III.                                                                        
  The people Nick enjoyed only two weeks before now seem "septic" to        
him. The word septic is very strong; it means "putrid" or "rotten."         
Except for the time she spends alone with Gatsby sitting on Nick's          
steps, Daisy doesn't have a good time either. The guests seem ill           
humored, out of control, false. The characters- Doctor Civet, Miss          
Baedeker, an unnamed movie star and her director, a small producer          
with a blue nose- all seem part of a phony stage play. Nick compares        
them to the stars who are here one season, gone the next.                   
  Tom and Daisy argue. Tom is becoming more and more suspicious             
about who Gatsby is and where he gets his money. Gatsby's nothing more      
than a big bootlegger, he tells Daisy- which is true. Daisy defends         
Gatsby with a lie, yet she captures the essence of Gatsby more              
honestly than Tom's merciless truth.                                        
  The chapter ends with a very important scene between Gatsby and Nick      
after Tom and Daisy have left. Gatsby feels sad because Daisy didn't        
have a good time, but his sadness goes deeper than that. What really        
upsets him is that he can't turn back time. "I wouldn't ask too much        
of her," Nick says. "You can't repeat the past." "Can't repeat the          
past?" Gatsby cries out in desperation. "Why of course you can!"            
What Gatsby wants is to obliterate the five years since he last saw         
Daisy. He wants life to be as wonderful and as beautiful as he              
believed it could be. Like all of us, he wants to ignore the fact that      
life is a process of change, and that time never stands still. If only      
Daisy would tell Tom, "I never loved you!" If only he could take Daisy      
back to Louisville, marry her, and begin their lives together as            
though there had been no Tom, no daughter. He must win her to               
satisfy his own Platonic image of himself, the ideal self which he          
associates with his love for Daisy in Louisville in the autumn of           
1917.                                                                       
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: INCARNATION  Fitzgerald uses the word incarnation to make us        
understand the meaning of that moment in Louisville. Incarnation means      
made into flesh, as in the Christian notion that God became flesh in        
Jesus Christ. In Louisville on the autumn night, Gatsby's dream became      
incarnated in Daisy. Kissing her for the first time so overpowered him      
that he knew he must give up everything for her. Gatsby at that moment      
"wed his unutterable visions to her perishable breath." Because he was      
only human, he had narrowed his dream and embodied it in something          
human, something tangible.                                                  
  The tragedy of Jay Gatsby is his choice of Daisy as the person in         
whom to embody his dream. This tragedy, as we saw in "The Author and        
His Times," was not unlike Fitzgerald's own when he embodied his dream      
in Zelda. Because of the impossibility of their dreams and the              
nature of the women in whom they vested them, both Gatsby and Scott         
Fitzgerald were doomed to tragic failure. But that may be why we            
love them- whether we should or not.                                        
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
                                                                            
CHAPTER_VII                                                                 
                             CHAPTER VII                                    
-                                                                           
  Chapter VII joins all the major characters and geographical               
locations of the novel together in a final catastrophe. In terms of         
the action, it is the most important chapter in the novel.                  
  Now that Gatsby has won Daisy, he has called off his parties,             
fired his servants, and replaced them with friends of Meyer Wolfsheim.      
His dealings with Wolfsheim reinforce our fears about what he is doing      
to make his money. His retreat from a glittering nightlife shows us         
how far his obsession with Daisy has gone. He has dismissed his             
servants because Daisy has been coming to his house in the afternoons,      
and he doesn't want anyone around who will gossip. The only reason          
he gave parties was in the wild hope that Daisy, would come- and now        
she is his.                                                                 
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: THE WEATHER  Fitzgerald carefully orchestrates the weather          
throughout the novel. The showdown between Tom and Gatsby, for              
instance, takes place on the hottest day of the summer. The late            
August heat is oppressive. There is nothing comforting about nature in      
this modern wasteland; the sun is more a burden than a nourisher of         
life.                                                                       
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  On the appointed day, Nick arrives for lunch at Tom and Daisy's           
house. Gatsby is there; so is Jordan Baker. All the major figures           
are together if this were the final scene in a Shakespearean                
tragedy. The nurse brings in the Buchanans' daughter. Gatsby is             
stunned; he had never quite believed the child existed until this           
moment. Drinks are served, and everyone tries to be well mannered,          
avoiding the issue at hand. But Daisy and Gatsby cannot conceal             
their love for one another, and Tom sees it.                                
  Daisy has suggested that they go to New York for the afternoon,           
and Tom now takes her up on it. Notice that they choose New York for        
the confrontation to come- the same setting that Fitzgerald used for        
the drunken party in Chapter II. There are close parallels between the      
two parties, not only in the way the characters behave at them, but in      
the fact that they have to pass through the valley of ashes to get          
there.                                                                      
  Jordan, Tom, and Nick ride together in Gatsby's car and stop at           
Wilson's garage to buy gas. Daisy and Gatsby drive by in Tom's blue         
coupe, unnoticed by Myrtle Wilson. What Myrtle does notice from her         
upstairs window is her lover Tom Buchanan, sitting in the yellow Rolls      
Royce with Jordan. Jordan she takes for Daisy.                              
  The whole scene at Wilson's garage has an eerie, mythic quality,          
as though it were set in a world of its own. Wilson, described              
literally as "green," has discovered that his wife has been having          
an affair, but he doesn't know with whom. Myrtle thinks her husband         
knows it's, Tom and watches, "terrified," from the window. Nick             
realizes that Wilson and Tom are in identical positions- both having        
just learned that their wives are unfaithful. Wilson wants to take          
Myrtle away- out West- and Tom begins to feel his whole world               
collapsing. Over all this, the eyes of Dr. T. J. Eckleburg "kept their      
vigil." The eyes seem to mock these characters' feeble attempts to          
hide from the truth. The eyes alone seem to see the corruption and the      
decadence beneath the gorgeous facade.                                      
  The yellow Rolls catches up with the blue coupe, and they decide          
to engage a suite at the Plaza Hotel. It's four o'clock in the              
afternoon and the heat is overwhelming. Tom, his ego battered by the        
day's events, mocks Gatsby for calling people "old sport," insinuating      
that Gatsby never went to Oxford. Gatsby, in a response that                
delights Nick, simply tells the truth. He attended Oxford for five          
months after the war through an opportunity offered to some of the          
officers. Unwilling to let Gatsby get the upper hand, Tom asks him          
point blank what his intentions are towards Daisy and starts attacking      
Gatsby about his parties and his life-style. Gatsby, pushed into a          
corner, responds, "'Your wife doesn't love you. She's never loved you.      
She loves me.'"                                                             
  The two men go after each other, begging Daisy to support them.           
Gatsby wants Daisy to say she never loved Tom, never in all the             
years of their marriage. It is this effort to deny the past- to             
shape the world according to his dream- that brings about Gatsby's          
downfall. Tom admits he has been less than an ideal husband, but            
points out "'Why- there're things between Daisy and me that you'll          
never know, things that neither of us can ever forget.'" Daisy has          
tried up to this point to support Gatsby, but now she finds herself         
turning to Tom. Now that Gatsby's dream has been pierced, Tom finds it      
easy to tear it to pieces. He has done some investigating of                
Gatsby's activities and has evidence about his "drug-store" fronts for      
bootlegging operations. With each thrust, Gatsby's parries become           
weaker and weaker, and we can feel Daisy slipping slowly but quietly        
back into the protective camp of her husband. A romantic dream is           
worth less to her than the security of a husband, unfaithful though he      
may be. For Gatsby there is nothing left but "the dead dream," which        
sustains him like a ghostly spirit that fights on after the body is         
dead. The party is over. Tom has won. He is confident enough to send        
Gatsby and Daisy home together in Gatsby's yellow car; Gatsby can do        
no more harm to him. When they leave, Nick realizes that today is           
his thirtieth birthday.                                                     
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: NICK'S THIRTIETH BIRTHDAY  Nick's birthday, like the green          
light and the eyes of Dr. Eckleburg, is one of those symbols that           
gives the novel's action a deeper meaning. While we identify                
emotionally with Gatsby, this is Nick's novel too, and his birthday         
reminds us that it is a novel about Nick's growing up. He came to           
New York, naive and inexperienced, having learned about life through        
books. The summer's events have taught him about life in a way that no      
book ever could- just as the years on Dan Cody's yacht educated             
Gatsby. The final phase of his education is learning about death,           
and death is just around the corner.                                        
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Fitzgerald lets us think about death before we know the victim.           
The suspense works nicely; for a short time we know neither who is          
dead nor how the person died. Michaelis, the young Greek who runs           
the all-night restaurant next door to Wilson's garage, tells the story      
as he experienced it: Myrtle Wilson, who had been locked indoors for        
most of the day by her husband, had rushed out into the street shortly      
after seven, frantically waving her arms, only to be struck by a car        
coming from New York. The car had paused for a moment and then              
driven on into the night. We are not told whose car it was, but we can      
guess. Nick, piecing events together from Michaelis' and newspaper          
accounts, pictures Myrtle Wilson kneeling in the road, her mouth            
wide open, her "Left breast swinging loose like a flap." He wants to        
emphasize her extraordinary vitality at the moment of her death and         
the desperate agony with which she tries to hold on to life.                
  When Tom arrives with Nick and Jordan, his first thought is that          
Wilson will remember the yellow car from that afternoon. His second         
thought is that Gatsby was the driver. Tom has his dreams, small as         
they may be, and he could never let himself believe that Daisy might        
have been at the wheel.                                                     
  As for Nick, he has had enough of all of these Easterners. When he        
arrives with the others at Tom's house, he remains outside.                 
Suddenly, Gatsby calls to him from the bushes. He had been waiting for      
them to get back, afraid that Tom might do something harmful to Daisy.      
Gatsby tells Nick that Daisy was driving and that he has decided to         
take the blame for her. What other decision was possible by a man so        
deeply in love? He is still afraid to leave and sends Nick to check on      
Daisy. Nick looks in a window and sees Daisy and Tom sitting                
opposite each other at the kitchen table, eating cold fried chicken         
and talking. It is an ordinary domestic scene in sharp contrast to the      
drama that surrounds them. They aren't happy, but they are not unhappy      
either. Nick realizes that they have accepted each other again and          
that Gatsby has lost Daisy irrevocably. She has returned to the             
protection of Tom's money and influence. He will take care of her           
and get her through the crisis. Nick goes home and leaves Gatsby            
"standing there in the moonlight- watching over nothing."                   
  The dream is over.                                                        
                                                                            
CHAPTER_VIII                                                                
                             CHAPTER VIII                                   
-                                                                           
  Chapter VIII begins a few hours later. Nick has been unable to            
sleep, and hearing Gatsby come in, he goes over to his friend's             
house to talk. For the better part of the chapter Nick is alone with        
Gatsby in his deserted mansion, listening to the story of Gatsby's          
youth, his courtship of Daisy, and his experiences during the war. The      
information helps Nick put together the final pieces of the puzzle          
that is Gatsby. Now that the dream is over, the past is more real to        
Gatsby than ever. Gatsby hopes that by talking about the Daisy he knew      
in Louisville in 1917 he can keep the ghost of his dream alive.             
  All of us have wanted something we couldn't have, something that was      
beyond our reach. And so, as Gatsby tells Nick about his courtship          
of Daisy, we can't help but sympathize with him. We can understand how      
he felt when he entered Daisy's home for the first time and fell in         
love with everything about her. It was not only Daisy he hungered for,      
it was her house and her possessions, too. The fact that everybody          
wanted her merely increased her worth in Gatsby's eyes. He himself was      
nothing but "a penniless young man without a past." She stood for           
everything he was not- for everything he wanted to have and to become.      
And so he "committed himself to the following of a grail," and made         
marrying Daisy his ultimate goal in life.                                   
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: The grail- or the chalice used by Christ at the Last Supper-        
is what the knights of the round table were searching for. If they          
found it, they would be saved. Fitzgerald uses the word grail to            
suggest that for Gatsby, marrying Daisy was a kind of religious quest.      
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
-                                                                           
  Daisy promised to wait for Gatsby until the war ended. What Gatsby        
has not bargained for was Daisy's youth and her need for love and           
the attention of society. She was too frivolous and insecure to stay        
alone for long, and soon began going out to parties and dances. At one      
of them, she met Tom Buchanan, who seemed safe and strong. She loved        
Jay, but knew nothing about him- nothing about his past or his              
practical plans for the future. And he wasn't there. So she married         
Tom.                                                                        
  The previous chapter took place on the hottest day of the summer.         
Now it is early morning. Autumn- symbol of change and of the                
approach of death- is in the air. The gardener informs Gatsby that          
he will drain the pool, because the falling leaves will clog the            
pipes. Gatsby asks him to wait a day because he has never used the          
pool and wants to take a swim.                                              
  Nick says good-bye to Gatsby, turns to walk away, then pauses, turns      
back, and shouts "'They're a rotten crowd. You're worth the whole damn      
bunch put together.'"                                                       
  It's a very special moment that reveals to us why the novel is            
called The Great Gatsby. Nick disapproves of Gatsby "from beginning to      
end"- disapproves of his vulgar materialism; his tasteless pink suits;      
his "gonnegtion" with Meyer Wolfsheim; his love of a woman as               
shallow as Daisy; his pathetic efforts to win her back by showing           
off what he has rather than who he is. And yet he is not part of the        
"foul dust." His "incorruptible dream" has something pure and noble         
about it, which sets him apart from the others. Tom, Daisy, Jordan-         
they belong to the "rotten crowd" because they are selfish,                 
materialistic, and cruel. They are without spiritual values or              
compassion. Gatsby, on the surface, seems just as far away from beauty      
and grace. In reality he is nothing more than a thug. And yet in            
Nick's eyes- and perhaps in ours- he is "worth the whole damn bunch         
put together" because of his total dedication to his dream. When the        
dream is gone, he has nothing left to live for.                             
  Nick takes the train to New York, but he can't work. He keeps             
thinking about Gatsby. Not even Jordan Baker can get his mind off           
his friend. She tries to meet him in the city for a date, but Nick          
turns her down- a fact that will contribute to their eventual break up      
in the final chapter. Nick is tired of "the whole rotten bunch," and        
that includes Jordan.                                                       
  Unable to reach Gatsby by phone, Nick takes an early train back to        
West Egg. As he passes the valley of ashes, he thinks about Myrtle          
Wilson's death and tells us what George Wilson was doing from the time      
of the accident to the present moment. Nick has gotten his information      
from the Greek Michaelis and from newspaper reports.                        
  Michaelis had sat up all night with George Wilson. At the very            
moment that Nick and Gatsby were watching the dawn in West Egg,             
Michaelis and Wilson were looking at the eyes of Dr. T. J.                  
Eckleburg, "which had just emerged, pale and enormous from the              
dissolving night." To Wilson, the eyes of Dr. Eckleburg are the             
all-seeing, all-judging eyes of God. Wilson now believes that the           
car that hit Myrtle was being driven by her lover. He has made up           
his mind to play God himself and to revenge the murder of his wife. It      
is simply a matter of finding out who owns the yellow car. His first        
step is to find Tom Buchanan; Tom drove the car to New York the day         
before and will know who was driving it back from New York when it hit      
his wife.                                                                   
  By the time Nick gets to West Egg, Gatsby is lying dead in his pool.      
The tragedy is complete. Wilson, having found out from Tom where            
Gatsby lived, had gone to Gatsby's mansion and found him floating on        
an air mattress in the pool. Wilson had shot Gatsby, then himself.          
  Nick wonders what Gatsby might have been thinking as he lay on the        
mattress in the pool just before Wilson's arrival:                          
-                                                                           
  He must have looked up at an unfamiliar sky through frightening           
leaves and shivered as he found what a grotesque thing a rose is and        
how raw the sunlight was upon the scarcely created. A new world,            
material without being real, where poor ghosts, breathing dreams            
like air, drifted fortuitously about...                                     
-                                                                           
  One key to understanding this difficult passage is the phrase,            
"material without being real." What Nick means is that for Gatsby, the      
world is "material"- it is something he can touch and see and feel-         
yet it is completely without meaning for him. Without Daisy- without        
his dream- to sustain him he is like a child who wakes up one day           
and finds himself in an utterly frightening and unfamiliar world.           
Gatsby has lived "too long with a single dream"; without it life has        
become absurd. A rose is beautiful because we feel its beauty, not          
because it possesses beauty in itself. In the same way, the green           
light at the end of Daisy's dock was special only because it meant          
something special to Gatsby. In this new world, which Gatsby                
encounters a rose is just a rose and a green light is not more than         
a green light. Gatsby has been forced to grow up, or at least to            
give up his childlike sense of wonder. Unlike the rest of the rotten        
crowd, he cannot live without this private vision, and so he is, in         
a sense, already dead when Wilson shoots him.                               
                                                                            
CHAPTER_IX                                                                  
                              CHAPTER IX                                    
-                                                                           
  Chapter IX covers the period from Gatsby's death to Nick's departure      
for the Midwest later that autumn. It is a chapter which allows             
Fitzgerald to tie together loose ends and to sum up the larger              
significance of the novel in a final poetic passage that has become         
one of the most famous in American literature.                              
  Nick is still living in the East, but his heart is no longer              
there. "I found myself on Gatsby's side, and alone," he says. He tries      
to bring Gatsby's friends together for the funeral, but everyone has        
conveniently disappeared. Tom and Daisy have gone away, leaving no          
address. Meyer Wolfsheim does not want to be involved with Gatsby           
now that the breath of scandal surrounds him. No one visits Gatsby's        
house now except policemen, photographers, and newspapermen.                
Finally, on the third day, a telegram arrives from Mr. Henry C. Gatz        
of Minnesota, Gatsby's father. He has read of his son's death and is        
on his way. (Is there any religious significance in the fact that           
the father tries to reach Gatsby three days after his son's death?          
Gatsby, like Christ, has been scorned by the world and only his father      
seems to care.) Nick tries to convince Klipspringer, "the boarder," to      
come to the funeral, but Klipspringer has a social engagement in            
Westport. When he asks Nick to send his tennis shoes, which he had          
left at Gatsby's, Nick hangs up on him.                                     
  No friends come to the funeral except Owl Eyes, the man who had           
admired Gatsby's library back in the third chapter. Why he should care      
enough to come makes for interesting speculation: your ideas are as         
good as any.                                                                
  As they stand there in the rain- Nick, Mr. Gatz, Owl Eyes, and a few      
servants- we cannot help but be appalled by the way his so-called           
friends have deserted him when he is no longer of any use to them. You      
can look at their desertion, as Nick surely does, as proof of their         
moral and spiritual bankruptcy. Or you can argue that Gatsby, in            
pursuit of a false dream, has brought this fate down on himself.            
  Gatsby's father, of course, has loved his son all these years and         
followed his career with special interest. He is proud of his boy           
and totally unaware of the darker side of his life. He has saved a          
picture of his son's house, which he apparently takes great pride in        
showing to others as proof of his son's success. He has also brought        
along a book, Hopalong Cassidy, which Jimmy owned as a boy. On the          
flyleaf is a daily schedule of exercise, study, sports, "elocution,"        
and work. The schedule, which reads like an excerpt from Ben                
Franklin's Almanac, reminds us how deeply Gatsby believed- even as a        
boy- in the American dream of success. Like millions of other young         
Americans, he must have believed that life rewards those who work           
hard, and that if he only stuck to his plan he could achieve                
whatever he set out to accomplish. Whether Fitzgerald's novel               
praises or condemns this dream is something you'll have to determine        
for yourself.                                                               
  With the account of Gatsby's funeral, Nick's story comes to an            
end. In the novel's closing pages, Nick turns in on himself, and talks      
about his own values and his preparations for a return to the Midwest.      
  Before he leaves, Nick ends his relationship with Jordan Baker.           
The scene with Jordan parallels the one at the end of Chapter III           
where they discuss careless people and bad drivers. In both scenes          
driving becomes a metaphor for life. Careless drivers stand for             
those who hurt other people. Jordan is a careless driver, Nick is not.      
Is this what drew them together and what ultimately pulled them apart?      
Nick's feelings about Jordan are ambivalent throughout the scene, as        
they are throughout the book. He is still in love with her, still           
attracted to her, yet something in him wants to write an end to this        
chapter in his life. She says she's engaged to another man; he doesn't      
believe it. We sense that he could probably get her back if he              
apologized for his behavior on the phone the day of Gatsby's death.         
But he won't do that.                                                       
  Nor will he, at first, shake hands with Tom Buchanan when he sees         
him on Fifth Avenue. Although he blames Tom for Gatsby's death- it was      
Tom who told Wilson that Gatsby owned the car- he can't really argue        
with Tom or get mad at him. Why? Because Tom believes that Gatsby           
was the driver and that his action was "entirely justified." Nick           
probably realizes that his own moral standards will mean nothing to         
Tom, and that the only way to deal with his type is to turn around and      
walk away. Nick at this moment sees Tom and Daisy as careless people        
who "smashed up things and creatures and then retreated back into           
their money... and let other people clean up the mess they had              
made." He calls Jordan careless too- a "careless" driver. Nick's            
decision to leave the East is tied up with his reaction of careless         
people. He doesn't want to become that way himself. It's uncertain          
when he finally shakes hands with Tom, whether he has finally               
learned to accept others who are different from himself, thus               
getting rid of what Tom calls his "provincial squeamishness"- or            
whether he is doing only what is proper for a gentleman to do. In           
any case, he is now rid of Tom and the world he represents, and can         
return to a world of principles and traditions in the Midwest.              
  There's no way you can understand Nick's final thoughts without           
having them in front of you. So, open your books and read Nick's words      
again. The meaning of the novel is summed up here, and the novel is         
transformed from a story of a small group of people at a moment of          
time to a portrait of an entire nation.                                     
  It is Nick's last night in West Egg. He has walked over to                
Gatsby's mansion and erased an obscene word someone has scrawled on         
the deserted house. He walks down to the beach. As the moon rises           
and the houses melt away in his imagination, he thinks of what this         
island must have looked like to the Dutch sailors seeing it for the         
first time in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. It was a new         
world then- pure, unspoiled. Nick calls it "a fresh green breast of         
the new world." Nick realizes that men have always been dreamers,           
but that dreamers cannot simply dream. They must have some object or        
person to fix their dreams upon. Such was this continent, he thinks,        
in the early days of the Republic. The idea of America as a land of         
infinite possibilities was so magnificent that man was "face to face        
for the last time in history with something commensurate to his             
capacity for wonder." The land- its physical beauty and its apparently      
limitless horizons- were worthy of the dream.                               
  We have come to call this idea "the American dream." Jefferson,           
Emerson, Thoreau, and Whitman were only a few of the spokesmen for          
this dream who saw in America a hope for equality and                       
self-fulfillment. This was Gatsby's dream, too, Nick thinks. For            
Gatsby the green light at the end of Daisy's dock symbolized the            
same American dream that drove the Dutch sailors to the New World, the      
Minutemen to Concord, and Thoreau to Walden Pond. Gatsby believed in        
the dream, and Nick will always love him for it. But what Gatsby never      
understood is that the dream was already behind him, "somewhere back        
in that vast obscurity beyond the city, where the dark fields of the        
republic rolled on under the night." Unable to find an object or a          
person commensurate with his capacity for wonder, Gatsby finds              
Daisy, an unworthy and shallow substitute for the real dream.               
-                                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
  NOTE: Nick seems to suggest that America in the 1920s has lost its        
way- deliberately or inevitably. American has become a shallow,             
materialistic nation, and the dream for which people fought and             
about which poets wrote has turned into a cheap and vulgar                  
substitute for the real thing.                                              
  Fitzgerald seems to be saying that what keeps Americans going as          
individuals is the belief in that dream, and so they struggle like          
Gatsby to attain it. But they are like "boats against the current,          
borne back ceaselessly into the past." Americans row and row against        
the current of time, trying to get back to that dream, bearing              
themselves backward like Gatsby, who believed the past could be             
repeated, but doomed by the hand of time to failure. Whether                
Fitzgerald believes Americans can recapture that dream, or whether          
it's part of their lost childhood- both as individuals and as a             
nation- is something you'll have to decide for yourself.                    
  The Great Gatsby is not, then, just a book about the 1920s. It is         
a book about America- its promise, and the betrayal of that promise.        
Throughout the book Fitzgerald has contrasted Gatsby the dreamer            
with "the foul dust" that preyed on his dream. The tragedy of Gatsby        
is that he still dreams the dream, but that he is not wise enough or        
strong enough to see that Daisy is not worthy of his devotion, of           
his sacrifice. He cannot step back to see where he has gone wrong.          
Nick can. Nick loves Gatsby, but he knows what is wrong with                
Gatsby's dream. And so, his education completed, he returns to the          
Midwest to begin his own adult life.                                        
---------------------------------------------------------------------       
                                                                            
TESTS_AND_ANSWERS                                                           
                            A STEP BEYOND                                   
                          TESTS AND ANSWERS                 (FGRETEST)      
-                                                                           
                                TESTS                                       
-                                                                           
  TEST 1                                                                    
-                                                                           
  _____  1. Nick Carraway was born                                          
-                                                                           
            A. in the Northeast                                             
            B. in the Midwest                                               
            C. in the South                                                 
-                                                                           
  _____  2. The character who first appears "in riding clothes...           
            standing with his legs apart on the front porch" is             
-                                                                           
            A. Gatsby                                                       
            B. Tom Buchanan                                                 
            C. George Wilson                                                
-                                                                           
  _____  3. The pretentious expression, "I'm p-paralyzed with               
            happiness," is spoken by                                        
-                                                                           
            A. Jordan Baker                                                 
            B. Daisy Buchanan                                               
            C. Gatsby                                                       
-                                                                           
  _____  4. James Gatz is                                                   
-                                                                           
            A. Daisy's cousin                                               
            B. Gatsby's piano player                                        
            C. Gatsby's real name                                           
-                                                                           
  _____  5. Nick Carraway recalls a story which implied that Jordan         
            Baker once                                                      
-                                                                           
            A. betrayed a close friend                                      
            B. stole some money                                             
            C. cheated at golf                                              
-                                                                           
  _____  6. Gatsby shows a police officer                                   
-                                                                           
            A. a fifty dollar bill                                          
            B. a Christmas card from the police commissioner                
            C. the damage done to the front fender of his car               
-                                                                           
  _____  7. The character who hangs up the phone in Nick's ear "with a      
            sharp click" is                                                 
-                                                                           
            A. Gatsby                                                       
            B. Tom Buchanan                                                 
            C. Jordan Baker                                                 
-                                                                           
  _____  8. When Nick tells Gatsby, "You can't repeat the past,"            
            Gatsby replies                                                  
-                                                                           
            A. "Of course you can."                                         
            B. "After all I've done? That's nonsense."                      
            C. "I'd never thought of that before, Old Sport."               
-                                                                           
  _____  9. Doctor T. J. Eckleburg becomes a symbol of                      
-                                                                           
           A. Gatsby's "romantic readiness"                                 
           B. Nick's friendship for Gatsby                                  
           C. the lack of morals prevalent in the East                      
-                                                                           
  _____ 10. Myrtle Wilson's nose is broken by                               
-                                                                           
            A. Gatsby                                                       
            B. Tom Buchanan                                                 
            C. George Wilson                                                
-                                                                           
  11. Is Gatsby a "hero?" Discuss.                                          
-                                                                           
  12. Describe Fitzgerald's attitude toward money in The Great Gatsby.      
-                                                                           
  13. Discuss Nick Carraway as Narrator and Character.                      
-                                                                           
  14. Analyze Fitzgerald's use of setting as "moral geography."             
-                                                                           
  15. Select one of the major symbols of the novel and show how             
Fitzgerald uses it.                                                         
-                                                                           
  TEST 2                                                                    
-                                                                           
  _____  1. The expression "and the holocaust was complete" refers to       
-                                                                           
            A. Myrtle's death                                               
            B. George Wilson's death                                        
            C. Gatsby's death                                               
-                                                                           
  _____  2. Nick left his home to come to New York in an effort to          
-                                                                           
            A. make money                                                   
            B. meet new people                                              
            C. locate Gatsby                                                
-                                                                           
  _____  3. The character who has "one of those rare smiles with a          
            quality of eternal reassurance in it, that you may come         
            across four of five times in life" is                           
-                                                                           
            A. Daisy Buchanan                                               
            B. Gatsby                                                       
            C. Jordan Baker                                                 
-                                                                           
  _____  4. The character who, according to Gatsby, "fixed the world        
            series" is                                                      
-                                                                           
            A. Wolfsheim                                                    
            B. Klipspringer                                                 
            C. Owl Eyes                                                     
-                                                                           
  _____  5. Apparently, most of Gatsby's money, has come from               
-                                                                           
            A. drug sales                                                   
            B. bootlegging                                                  
            C. bond investments                                             
-                                                                           
  _____  6. When Myrtle Wilson is killed, the car that hit her was          
            driven by                                                       
-                                                                           
            A. Gatsby                                                       
            B. Daisy                                                        
            C. Tom                                                          
-                                                                           
  _____  7. "The promise of a decade of loneliness" is sensed by            
-                                                                           
            A. Nick                                                         
            B. Gatsby                                                       
            C. Dan Cody                                                     
-                                                                           
  _____  8. The most significant change in Daisy's life since before        
            the war is that she now                                         
-                                                                           
            A. has a child                                                  
            B. loves Gatsby                                                 
            C. likes having money                                           
-                                                                           
  _____  9. "That ashen, fantastic figure gliding toward him through        
            the amorphous trees" is                                         
-                                                                           
            A. George Wilson                                                
            B. Gatsby                                                       
            C. Tom Buchanan                                                 
-                                                                           
  _____ 10. A symbol of the human capacity for hope is                      
-                                                                           
            A. Gatsby's immense mansion                                     
            B. the green light at the end of Daisy's dock                   
            C. Owl Eyes                                                     
-                                                                           
  11. Compare and contrast The Great Gatsby with Conrad's Heart of          
Darkness.                                                                   
-                                                                           
  12. Analyze the influence of T. S. Eliot's "The Waste Land" on The        
Great Gatsby.                                                               
-                                                                           
  13. Discuss Fitzgerald's handling of time in The Great Gatsby.            
-                                                                           
  14. Show how Gatsby and Nick are really two sides of Fitzgerald.          
-                                                                           
  15. Describe how The Great Gatsby is a commentary on the American         
Dream.                                                                      
-                                                                           
                               ANSWERS                                      
-                                                                           
  TEST 1                                                                    
-                                                                           
  1. B     2. B     3. B    4. C     5. C      6. B     7. C                
  8. A     9. C    10. B                                                    
-                                                                           
  11. Everyone wants to admire someone. Do you admire Gatsby? Is he         
a hero to you? If so, why? If not, why not? This essay gives you a          
wonderful opportunity to take sides. From one point of view, Gatsby is      
a crook, a bootlegger, a vulgar materialist. From another point of          
view, he is a dreamer, faithful to his dream to the very end. Nick          
sees him as "great," despite the fact that Gatsby stands for many           
things that Nick doesn't believe in.                                        
  To write this essay you will want to look with particular care at         
those passages where Nick talks about Gatsby- both near the middle          
of Chapter VIII, and in the closing pages of the novel. If you think        
that Gatsby is not a hero, you will want to pay special attention to        
Meyer Wolfsheim and to Gatsby's association with him. Look at the many      
strange phone calls from Philadelphia and Chicago and at Tom's              
thoughts in Chapter VII on what Wolfsheim and Gatsby did to Walter          
Chase.                                                                      
  For further details see the section on "Jay Gatsby" in The                
Characters.                                                                 
-                                                                           
  12. Most of us, like Fitzgerald, have ambivalent feelings about           
money. We want it, we are excited by it, but we don't want it to            
dominate our lives. What do you think Fitzgerald's attitude toward          
money is in this novel? Does he treat all the rich characters in the        
same way? Is money itself good or evil, or does it depend on who is         
using it and for what purpose? These are all questions an essay             
might explore.                                                              
  You will want to look at the description of Tom and Daisy's house in      
Chapter I and of Gatsby's house in Chapter III. Nick's comment about        
Tom and Daisy's money near the end of the final chapter is helpful, as      
is Nick's description of Tom as a character in Chapter I. Look at           
the scene in Chapter V where Gatsby shows off his possessions to            
Daisy. Why does Daisy cry in his shirts? What does this say about           
her attitude toward money and about things money can buy?                   
  There is no easy answer to this question, so don't feel that any one      
answer is right. Fitzgerald, as you read in The Author and His              
Times, said that he could hold two contradictory views at the same          
time. Perhaps that is what you think he does in this book?                  
-                                                                           
  13. This is a good essay question for those who enjoy debating            
with the critics. Most readers find Nick what is called a "reliable         
narrator." They share his views and read the novel from his point of        
view. A few critics disagree. They say Nick is immature and should          
be more critical of Gatsby than he is. They argue that Nick is too          
sentimental about Gatsby, and that it would be very dangerous for us        
to adopt the same attitude that Nick adopts.                                
  In writing this essay, you will want to understand clearly Nick's         
attitudes toward this Eastern world and the characters who live in it.      
Nick expresses his attitudes mainly in the first and last chapters.         
Once you have explored his point of view, you should be prepared to         
argue either that Fitzgerald shares Nick's views and wants us to share      
them, too; or that we as readers are being asked to be more mature and      
realistic than Nick is. Gary Scrimgeour's essay "Against The Great          
Gatsby," (see The Critics section) makes a good case against Nick,          
if you're looking for some help with your argument.                         
-                                                                           
  14. We have discussed this issue at length both in the section on         
setting and in the places in the scene-by-scene discussion where            
each of the settings is introduced for the first time. You will             
particularly want to review the opening three chapters where East Egg,      
West Egg, the valley of ashes, and New York City are each introduced        
for the first time. Ask yourself what values is each place                  
associated with. Is Fitzgerald supporting one set of values against         
the others? If so, with which of the places are we most asked to            
identify? Why? Write about the fact that all of the characters are          
originally from the Midwest- an important factor in this equation of        
place with values. In writing your essay, you may want to compare           
the locations in this novel with locations in your own community.           
-                                                                           
  15. Be sure you know what a symbol is before you start. Hugh              
Holman's A Handbook to Literature is very helpful. Then select the          
symbol you want to write about and go through the novel, noting each        
place it is mentioned. The green light is mentioned at the end of           
Chapter I, the middle of Chapter V, and on the last page of the novel.      
The eyes of Dr. T. J. Eckleburg are described in detail at the              
beginning of Chapter II. They are also an important part of Michaelis'      
description of George Wilson's state of mind in Chapter VIII.               
  Remember as you write that symbols don't mean just one thing.             
Symbols are pointers that merely suggest other things beyond                
themselves.                                                                 
-                                                                           
  TEST 2                                                                    
-                                                                           
  1. B     2. A     3. B     4. A     5. B     6. B     7. A                
  8. A     9. A    10. B                                                    
-                                                                           
  11. This is a particularly good essay topic if you have already           
studied Heart of Darkness. Both novels are short, compact, intense. In      
each case, an inexperienced young man who is the narrator (Nick in          
Fitzgerald's novel, Marlow in Conrad's) goes on a journey and meets an      
extraordinary character who has a profound influence on the young           
man's life. In each case the young man comes to admire the                  
extraordinary character, even though that character is someone the          
world might not admire. The heroes (Gatsby and Kurtz) die, and the          
young narrators are moved by those deaths to tell their stories.            
Fitzgerald modeled The Great Gatsby on Heart of Darkness, and a             
study of the two books together would be most rewarding.                    
  If the essay is a shorter one, then merely compare and contrast Nick      
and Marlow or Gatsby and Kurtz.                                             
-                                                                           
  12. If you have read Eliot's famous poem, published in 1922, you          
cannot help but be struck by some of the ways in which Fitzgerald           
learned from Eliot. Eliot's poem is full of barrenness, dryness, and        
sterility. His "Waste Land" is a desert land, thirsty for the water of      
spiritual rebirth. In Eliot's world the characters are shallow,             
without lasting values, without deep feelings. Fitzgerald's                 
characters, even the minor ones who show up at Gatsby's parties,            
suffer from the same emptiness, symbolized by "dust." Fitzgerald's          
valley of ashes is a symbol that may have been inspired directly by         
Eliot's masterpiece. Both Eliot and Fitzgerald were young men who           
became spokesmen for their generation. Many young men in the 1920s who      
read "The Waste Land" said that the poem expressed their own                
feelings about life; many said the same about Fitzgerald's work.            
-                                                                           
  13. How do we get to know people? We meet them, become interested in      
them, start a friendship perhaps, and then take an interest in their        
past lives. We get to know Gatsby in the same way. In the first             
three chapters Fitzgerald explores the present- the summer of 1922. In      
Chapters IV, VI, and VIII he takes us into the world of Gatsby's past.      
Gatsby is a kind of mystery to be solved, and we are given more and         
more clues as we go along. Our last piece of information about              
Gatsby's past does not come until Chapter IX, only pages before the         
end of the book. Discuss whether you find this movement back and forth      
from past to present more interesting than being told a story               
chronologically. (For more details, read comments on Form and               
Structure.)                                                                 
-                                                                           
  14. Fitzgerald often said that he had a romantic side that made           
him throw himself passionately into parties, and into other intense         
experiences with Zelda. That side didn't know when to say "no," and it      
often drove Fitzgerald into situations that were dangerous and              
destructive. The other side of Fitzgerald was hard working,                 
disciplined. This side of him wanted to be a famous writer and knew         
how much self-restraint and hard work were required to do the job           
well. You can argue in your paper that these two sides of Fitzgerald        
are captured in turn, by Nick and Gatsby.                                   
  It will help you to reread the section of this guide called The           
Author and His Times, and to read one of the fine Fitzgerald                
biographies by Arthur Mizener or Andrew Turnbull. You may want to take      
your essay a step afield by considering Gatsby and Nick as the two          
sides of any human being including yourself.                                
-                                                                           
  15. This subject has been treated frequently throughout this              
guidebook. See especially the comments under Themes, in the section         
called Other Elements. Marius Bewley's excellent essay, "Scott              
Fitzgerald's Criticism of America," is also very helpful. (see The          
Critics section). You will need to think about what the phrase "the         
American dream" means and whether or not it means the same thing as         
"the American dream of success." If it is "American" for a young man        
without money or family background to want to make it big, what is          
wrong with Gatsby's dream?                                                  
  Fitzgerald hints at an answer to this and related questions in the        
extraordinary passage on the final page of the novel (see commentary        
on Chapter IX). You will have to decide finally whether you think           
Fitzgerald is criticizing the American dream itself or just the form        
that the dream is taking during the 1920s.                                  
                                                                            
TERM_PAPER_IDEAS                                                            
                           TERM PAPER IDEAS                 (FGRETERM)      
-                                                                           
  1. Who is the central character of The Great Gatsby, Nick or Gatsby?      
Why?                                                                        
-                                                                           
  2. Examine Fitzgerald's use of Nick as narrator of the story. What        
are the advantages and/or problems of telling the story in this way?        
-                                                                           
  3. Examine Nick's values. How are these similar to or different from      
the values of the other characters?                                         
-                                                                           
  4. Analyze Jay Gatsby. What makes him "great"?                            
-                                                                           
  5. Analyze Gatsby's dream. What does he believe in? Is his dream          
worthwhile?                                                                 
-                                                                           
  6. Analyze Nick's attitude toward Gatsby's dream. Do you think            
Nick is being too sentimental?                                              
-                                                                           
  7. What is meant by the phrase "the American dream"? How is Gatsby a      
novel about the American dream?                                             
-                                                                           
  8. Study Gatsby's past: his family background, his education under        
Dan Cody, his meeting with Daisy in Louisville in 1917. How does our        
knowledge of his past help us to understand who he really is?               
-                                                                           
  9. Analyze the symbolism of the green light at the end of Daisy's         
dock.                                                                       
-                                                                           
  10. Analyze the symbolism of the eyes of Dr. T. J. Eckleburg.             
-                                                                           
  11. Write an essay on the use of color symbolism in the novel,            
especially the colors white and yellow.                                     
-                                                                           
  12. Examine the symbolic use of names in the novel. Are the names         
simply realistic or do they stand for something beyond themselves?          
-                                                                           
  13. Examine the valley of ashes as a symbolic setting in the              
novel. How is it related to T. S. Eliot's "Waste Land"?                     
-                                                                           
  14. Examine East Egg, especially the home of Tom and Daisy Buchanan,      
as a "moral" setting. What values of the Buchanans are mirrored in          
their life-style?                                                           
-                                                                           
  15. Examine the world of West Egg, especially Gatsby's mansion.           
How is it different from East Egg. Why? What does it represent?             
-                                                                           
  16. Examine New York City as a setting, especially through the two        
parties which occur in New York in Chapters II and VII.                     
-                                                                           
  17. Examine Tom Buchanan as a character. Is he sympathetic? If            
not, why? How does he symbolize the world of the very rich?                 
-                                                                           
  18. Examine Jordan Baker as a character, looking at her name, her         
honesty or dishonesty, her athletic career, her relationship with           
Nick.                                                                       
-                                                                           
  19. Examine Myrtle Wilson as a character. What makes us                   
sympathetic to her? How is she in some ways like Gatsby?                    
-                                                                           
  20. Look closely at the world of Gatsby's parties and the people who      
come to them. Who are they and how do they feel about Gatsby?               
-                                                                           
  21. Analyze the role of Meyer Wolfsheim in the novel. He is based on      
Arnold Rothstein ("the man who fixed the 1919 World Series"). You           
may wish to do some research on Rothstein.                                  
-                                                                           
  22. Do some reading on prohibition in the 1920s. How did the              
bootlegging business develop and who controlled it? How does our            
knowledge of this affect our understanding of Gatsby?                       
-                                                                           
  23. Scott and Zelda Fitzgerald lived in Great Neck, Long Island,          
during the early 1920s and gave and went to parties similar to              
Gatsby's. Do some reading on Scott and Zelda in Mizener or Turnbull         
and analyze the similarities and/or differences between the two             
worlds- Fitzgerald's and Gatsby's.                                          
-                                                                           
  24. Fitzgerald admitted that Gatsby started out as a particular           
person and ended up as part of himself. How is Fitzgerald like Gatsby?      
What aspects of himself does Fitzgerald seem to be dramatizing in           
Gatsby?                                                                     
-                                                                           
  25. Fitzgerald put another part of himself in Nick Carraway. How          
would you describe this aspect of Fitzgerald?                               
-                                                                           
  26. Compare and contrast Gatsby and Carraway as parts of yourself.        
-                                                                           
  27. What is meant by the term "The Jazz Age"? How is The Great            
Gatsby a portrait of the times?                                             
-                                                                           
  28. What do you think of the morality of the characters? Is               
Fitzgerald passing judgment on them? Are we being asked to?                 
-                                                                           
  29. Compare and contrast the parties in the first three chapters          
(the one at Tom and Daisy's, the one in New York, and the one at            
Gatsby's). What do we learn from an analysis of these three worlds?         
-                                                                           
  30. Do a close analysis of the scenes in Chapter V where Gatsby           
meets Daisy for the first time and takes her to see his house and           
his possessions. Does this scene increase your sympathy for Gatsby?         
-                                                                           
  31. Do a close analysis of the two parties at Gatsby's house              
(Chapters II and VI). How are they similar? How different? Is the           
difference important in the development of the novel's themes?              
-                                                                           
  32. Do a close analysis of the last page of the novel. What is            
Fitzgerald saying about the past? About American history?                   
-                                                                           
  33. Fitzgerald first thought of calling The Great Gatsby "Trimalchio      
in West Egg" or "Trimalchio." Who is Trimalchio? (See Glossary.)            
Compare and contrast Trimalchio and Gatsby.                                 
-                                                                           
  34. The narrative technique of Gatsby is modeled on Joseph                
Conrad's Heart of Darkness. Compare and contrast the two works,             
thematically and stylistically.                                             
-                                                                           
  35. Compare and contrast Nick Carraway with Marlow in Conrad's Heart      
of Darkness.                                                                
-                                                                           
  36. Compare and contrast Gatsby with Kurtz in Conrad's Heart of           
Darkness.                                                                   
-                                                                           
  37. Read the sections in Wayne C. Booth's The Rhetoric of Fiction on      
the difference between reliable and unreliable narrators. Would you         
consider Nick Carraway to be reliable?                                      
-                                                                           
  38. Analyze Fitzgerald's style in Gatsby. What do you think he is         
best at? Dialogue? Description? Narration of events? Reflection?            
-                                                                           
  39 Examine The Great Gatsby as a tragedy. Who is the tragic hero?         
-                                                                           
  40. Examine Daisy Buchanan as a character. What parallels do you see      
between her and Zelda Fitzgerald?                                           
-                                                                           
  41. Look at the people who attend Gatsby's funeral. Who are they?         
Who does not come? What comment is Fitzgerald making through this           
contrast?                                                                   
-                                                                           
  42. There is a lot of talk about carelessness in the novel. What          
does Fitzgerald mean by "carelessness"? Who is called careless and          
why?                                                                        
-                                                                           
  43. Is Gatsby just a book for rich people? If you are poor or             
black or Hispanic, how do you react to this book? What does it say          
to you about America?                                                       
-                                                                           
  44. Is Gatsby relevant to the late 20th century? If so, how?              
-                                                                           
  45. Compare Rudolph Miller in the story "Absolution" with Jay             
Gatsby. Fitzgerald originally intended to use "Absolution" as a             
preface to Gatsby. What parallels do you see?                               
-                                                                           
  46. Compare Dexter Green in the story "Winter Dreams" with Jay            
Gatsby. What relationships do you see between the characters?               
-                                                                           
  47. As a college or high school student, you go to parties and            
seek out members of the opposite sex in hopes of winning them. Does         
Gatsby's seeking out of Daisy correspond to this aspect of your life?       
-                                                                           
  48. Analyze the East and the Midwest as symbols of different              
morals and life-styles in the novel. Does the contrast still hold?          
-                                                                           
  49. The novel centers on three sexual relationships- Gatsby-Daisy,        
Tom-Myrtle, Nick-Jordan. Write an essay comparing arid contrasting          
these three affairs. Do you feel the same about all of them?                
-                                                                           
  50. Fitzgerald himself said the greatest flaw of the novel was his        
failure to develop the relationship between Gatsby and Daisy after          
their reunion in West Egg. Do you agree? What other flaws are there?        
                                                                            
GLOSSARY                                                                    
                               GLOSSARY                     (FGREGLOS)      
-                                                                           
  The Glossary is limited to proper nouns, the meaning of which             
might not be clear in the context of the novel. Symbolic terms such as      
grail or incarnation are explained in the chapter-by-chapter analysis.      
-                                                                           
  "AIN'T WE GOT FUN"  A very popular song of the day, Klipspringer          
sings it to Gatsby and Daisy in Chapter VI.                                 
-                                                                           
  BELASCO  David Belasco (1853-1931) was a very successful American         
actor, producer, playwright, and theater manager. Owl Eyes thinks of        
Gatsby as a "regular Belasco," because of his magnificent library           
and real books.                                                             
-                                                                           
  JAMES J. HILL  American railroad tycoon and financier (1838-1916);        
one of many rich Americans referred to in the novel.                        
-                                                                           
  KAISER WILHELM  The Emperor of Germany in 1914 at the outbreak of         
World War I. Gatsby is suspected of being a nephew of Kaiser Wilhelm.       
-                                                                           
  KANT  Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) was famous German philosopher who         
stared at a church steeple to help his concentration. Nick, in Chapter      
V, stares at Gatsby's house, "like Kant at his church steeple."             
-                                                                           
  LAKE FOREST  A suburb of Chicago where very rich and socially             
prestigious families live. Tom Buchanan comes East with a string of         
polo ponies from Lake Forest.                                               
-                                                                           
  MIDAS... MORGAN... MAECENAS  The first was the legendary king who         
was granted his wish that everything he touch change to gold. "Morgan"      
refers to J. Pierpont Morgan (1837-1913), the famous New York               
financier. "Maecenas" was a wealthy Etruscan patron of the Roman poets      
Horace and Virgil. All three are examples of Fitzgerald's                   
fascination with wealth and the very wealthy.                               
-                                                                           
  MONTENEGRO  Once a small country on the Adriatic Sea, now part of         
Yugoslavia. Gatsby says he has a medal from "little Montenegro."            
-                                                                           
  NEW HAVEN  The city in Connecticut where Yale University is located.      
"New Haven" in this novel means Yale, where Tom and Nick went to            
college.                                                                    
-                                                                           
  OXFORD  Oxford University in England. Meyer Wolfsheim refers to it        
mistakenly as "Oggsford College." Oxford is not a college, but a            
university, made up of a collection of colleges.                            
-                                                                           
  PLAZA HOTEL  The famous hotel in New York City at the corner of           
Fifth Avenue and Central Park South. You can still take carriage rides      
from the Plaza today. (see Chapter IV).                                     
-                                                                           
 ROCKEFELLER  John D. Rockefeller (1839 1939) was an industrialist and      
philanthropist who founded the Standard Oil Company. He was perhaps         
the ultimate symbol of wealth in the United States.                         
-                                                                           
  "SHEIK OF ARABY"  Another popular song of the day. overheard by Nick      
and Jordan in New York.                                                     
-                                                                           
  TOSTOFF  Vladimir Tostoff's Jazz History of the World is an               
imaginary composition by an imaginary composer. The jazz orchestra          
plays it for the guests at Gatsby's party in Chapter III. It's              
self-important title is Fitzgerald's cynical comment on how jazz tried      
to present itself as a serious rival to classical music during the          
'20s.                                                                       
-                                                                           
  TRIMALCHIO  Central character of the Satyricon by Petronius.              
Trimalchio is a vulgar, self-made millionaire whose brief and meteoric      
rise to the top parallels Gatsby's brief career. Fitzgerald thought of      
calling the novel, "Trimalchio in West Egg."                                
-                                                                           
  VON HINDENBURG  German general, chief of staff in World War I, later      
president of the Weimar Republic. Some say Gatsby worked for von            
Hindenberg- another example of the Gatsby myth.                             
-                                                                           
  WORLD SERIES OF 1919  The famous "Black Sox" scandal in which the         
Chicago White Sox deliberately lost the World Series to the Cincinnati      
Reds, a much weaker team, in order to make money for themselves. The        
arrangements were made through a group of gamblers, the key figure          
of which was Arnold Rothstein, the model for Meyer Wolfsheim in             
Gatsby. (See Chapter IV.)                                                   
                                                                            
CRITICS                                                                     
                             THE CRITICS                    (FGRECRIT)      
-                                                                           
  A LETTER TO FITZGERALD FROM HIS EDITOR, NOVEMBER 20, 1924                 
  I think you have every kind of right to be proud of this book. It is      
an extraordinary book, suggestive of all sorts of thoughts and              
moods. You adopted exactly the right method of telling it, that of          
employing a narrator who is more of a spectator than an actor: this         
puts the reader upon a point of observation on a higher level than          
that on which the characters stand and at a distance that gives             
perspective. In no other way could your irony have been so immensely        
effective, nor the reader have been enabled so strongly to feel at          
times the strangeness of human circumstance in a vast heedless              
universe. In the eyes of Dr. Eckleburg various readers will see             
different significances; but their presence gives a superb touch to         
the whole thing: great unblinking eyes, expressionless, looking down        
upon the human scene. It's magnificent!                                     
                                   Maxwell Perkins, Editor to Author:       
                              The Letters of Maxwell E. Perkins, 1950       
-                                                                           
  FITZGERALD'S DREAM: A PARALLEL TO GATSBY                                  
  When I was your age I lived with a great dream. The dream grew and I      
learned how to speak of it and make people listen. Then the dream           
divided one day when I decided to marry your mother after all, even         
though I knew she was spoiled and meant no good to me. I was sorry          
immediately I had married her, but being patient in those days, made        
the best of it and got to love her in another way. You came along           
and for a long time we made quite a lot of happiness out of our lives.      
But I was a man divided- she wanted me to work too much for her and         
not enough for my dream. She realized too late that work was                
dignity, and the only dignity, and tried to atone for it by working         
herself, but it was too late and she broke and is broken forever.           
                          Scott Fitzgerald, "Letter to His Daughter,"       
                      July 7, 1938 from Letters to His Daughter, 1965       
-                                                                           
  FITZGERALD'S DOUBLE VISION                                                
  He cultivated a sort of double vision. He was continually trying          
to present the glitter of life in the Princeton eating clubs, on the        
Riviera, on the North Shore of Long Island, and in the Hollywood            
studios; he surrounded his characters with a mist of admiration and         
simultaneously he drove the mist away... He regarded himself as a           
pauper living among millionaires... a sullen peasant among the              
nobility, and he said that his point of vantage "was the dividing line      
between two generations," prewar and postwar. It was this habit of          
keeping a double point of view that distinguished his work. There were      
popular and serious novelists in his time, but there was something          
of a gulf between them; Fitzgerald was one of the very few popular          
writers who were also serious artists.                                      
                            Malcolm Cowley, "Third Act and Epilogue,"       
                                                 The New Yorker, 1945       
-                                                                           
  FITZGERALD'S ARTISTIC METHOD IN GATSBY                                    
  ...the characters are not "developed": the wealthy and brutal Tom         
Buchanan haunted by his "scientific" vision of the doom of                  
civilization, the vaguely guilty, vaguely homosexual Jordan Baker, the      
dim Wolfsheim, who fixed the World Series of 1919, are treated, we          
might say, as if they were ideographs, a method of economy that is          
reinforced by the ideographic use of that is made of the Washington         
Heights flat, the terrible "valley of ashes" seen from the Long Island      
Railroad, Gatsby's incoherent parties, and the huge sordid eyes of the      
oculist's advertising sign. (It is a technique which gives the novel        
an affinity with The Waste Land, between whose author and Fitzgerald        
there existed a reciprocal admiration.) Gatsby himself, once stated,        
grows only in the understanding of the narrator. He is allowed to           
say very little in his own person. Indeed, apart from the famous            
"Her voice is full of money," he says only one memorable thing, but         
that remark is overwhelming in its intellectual audacity: when he is        
forced to admit that his lost Daisy did perhaps love her husband, he        
says, "In any case it was just personal." With that sentence he             
achieves an insane greatness, convincing us that he really is a             
Platonic conception of himself, really some sort of Son of God.             
                              Lionel Trilling, "F. Scott Fitzgerald,"       
                                        The Liberal Imagination, 1950       
-                                                                           
  THE GREAT GATSBY AND THE AMERICAN DREAM                                   
  The Great Gatsby is an exploration of the American dream as it            
exists in a corrupt period, and it is an attempt to determine that          
concealed boundary that divides the reality from the illusions. The         
illusions seem more real than the reality itself. Embodied in the           
subordinate characters in the novel, they threaten to invade the whole      
of the picture. On the other hand, the reality is embodied in               
Gatsby; and as opposed to the hard, tangible Illusions, the reality is      
a thing of the spirit, a promise rather than the possession of a            
vision, a faith in the half-glimpsed, but hardly understood                 
possibilities of life.                                                      
                                   Marius Bewley, "Scott Fitzgerald's       
                                          Criticism of America," 1954       
-                                                                           
  THE SYMBOLISM OF EAST AND WEST                                            
  Fitzgerald's dichotomy of East and West has the poetic truth of           
James's antithesis of provincial American virtue and refined                
European sensibility. Like The Portrait of a Lady and The Ambassadors,      
Gatsby is a story of "displaced persons" who have journeyed eastward        
in search of a larger and experience of life. To James this reverse         
migration from the New to the Old World has in itself no special            
significance. To Fitzgerald, however, the lure of the East                  
represents a profound displacement of the American dream, a turning         
back upon itself of the historic pilgrimage towards the frontier which      
had, in fact, created and sustained that dream.                             
                                 Robert Ornstein, "Scott Fitzgerald's       
                                        Fable of East and West," 1957       
-                                                                           
  COLOR SYMBOLISM IN THE GREAT GATSBY: DAISY                                
  The white Daisy embodies the vision which Gatsby (who, like Lord          
Jim, usually wears white suits) seeks to embrace- but which Nick,           
who discovers the corrupt admixture of dream and reality, rejects in        
rejecting Jordan. For, except in Gatsby's extravagant imagination, the      
white does not exist pure: it is invariably stained by the money,           
the yellow. Daisy is the white flower- with the golden center. If in        
her virginal beauty she "dressed in white and had a little white            
roadster," she is, Nick realizes, "high in a white palace the king's        
daughter, the golden girl." "Her voice is like money"; she carries a        
"little gold pencil"; when she visits Gatsby there are "two rows of         
brass buttons on her dress."                                                
                                Daniel J. Schneider, "Color-Symbolism       
                                           in The Great Gatsby," 1964       
-                                                                           
  AN ATTACK ON NICK AS A CHARACTER                                          
  Carraway's distinctiveness as a character is that he fails to             
learn anything from his story, that he can continue to blind himself        
even after his privileged overview of Gatsby's fate.... He refuses          
to admit that his alliance with Gatsby, his admiration for the man,         
results from their sharing the same weakness.... He has learned             
nothing. His failure to come to any self-knowledge makes him like           
the person who blames the stone for stubbing his toe. It seems              
inevitable that he will repeat the same mistakes as soon as the             
feeling that "temporarily closed out my interest in the abortive            
sorrows and short-winded elations of men" has departed.... Had              
Carraway been defeated by the impersonal forces of an evil world in         
which he was an ineffectual innocent, his very existence- temporary or      
not- would lighten the picture. But his defeat is caused by                 
something that lies within himself: his own lack of fibre, his own          
willingness to deny reality, his own substitution of dreams for             
knowledge of self and the world, his own sharing in the very vices          
of which his fellow men stand accused.                                      
                 Gary J. Scrimgeour, "Against The Great Gatsby," 1966       
                                                                            
ADVISORY_BOARD                                                              
                            ADVISORY BOARD                  (FGREADVB)      
-                                                                           
  We wish to thank the following educators who helped us focus our          
Book Notes series to meet student needs and critiqued our                   
manuscripts to provide quality materials.                                   
-                                                                           
  Murray Bromberg, Principal                                                
  Wang High School of Queens, Holliswood, New York                          
-                                                                           
  Sandra Dunn, English Teacher                                              
  Hempstead High School, Hempstead, New York                                
-                                                                           
  Lawrence J. Epstein, Associate Professor of English                       
  Suffolk County Community College, Selden, New York                        
-                                                                           
  Leonard Gardner, Lecturer, English Department                             
  State University of New York at Stony Brook                               
-                                                                           
  Beverly A. Haley, Member, Advisory Committee                              
  National Council of Teachers of English Student Guide Series              
  Fort Morgan, Colorado                                                     
-                                                                           
  Elaine C. Johnson, English Teacher                                        
  Tamalpais Union High School District                                      
  Mill Valley, California                                                   
-                                                                           
  Marvin J. LaHood, Professor of English                                    
  State University of New York College at Buffalo                           
-                                                                           
  Robert Lecker, Associate Professor of English                             
  McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada                               
-                                                                           
  David E. Manly, Professor of Educational Studies                          
  State University of New York College at Geneseo                           
-                                                                           
  Bruce Miller, Associate Professor of Education                            
  State University of New York at Buffalo                                   
-                                                                           
  Frank O'Hare, Professor of English                                        
  Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio                                     
-                                                                           
  Faith Z. Schullstrom, Member of Executive Committee                       
  National Council of Teachers of English                                   
  Director of Curriculum and Instruction                                    
  Guilderland Central School District, New York                             
-                                                                           
  Mattie C. Williams, Director, Bureau of Language Arts                     
  Chicago Public Schools, Chicago, Illinois                                 
-                                                                           
-                                                                           
                    THE END OF BARRON'S BOOK NOTES                          
                F. SCOTT FITZGERALD'S THE GREAT GATSBY                      
                                                                            
                                                                            
                               BIBLIOGRAPHY                 (FGREBIBL)      
                                                                            
GREAT_GATSBY                                                                
                           FURTHER READING                                  
-                                                                           
                            CRITICAL WORKS                                  
-                                                                           
  Much has been written about F Scott Fitzgerald and about The Great        
Gatsby in particular. The list that follows includes some of the            
most important works.                                                       
-                                                                           
  BIOGRAPHIES                                                               
-                                                                           
  Donaldson, Scott. Fool for Love. New York: Congdon & Weed, 1983           
-                                                                           
  Milford, Nancy. Zelda. New York: Harper & Row, 1970.                      
-                                                                           
  Mizener, Arthur. The Far Side of Paradise. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,      
1951.                                                                       
-                                                                           
  Turnbull, Andrew. Scott Fitzgerald. New York: Scribner's, 1962.           
-                                                                           
  CRITICAL STUDIES- BOOKS                                                   
-                                                                           
  Hoffman, Frederick J., ed. The Great Gatsby: A Study. New York:           
Scribner's, 1962.                                                           
-                                                                           
  _____. The Twenties. New York: Viking Press, 1955                         
-                                                                           
  Kazin, Alfred. F. Scott Fitzgerald: The Man and His Work, Cleveland:      
World, 1951.                                                                
-                                                                           
  Lockridge, Ernest H., ed. Twentieth Century Interpretations of The        
Great Gatsby, Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1968.                        
-                                                                           
  Miller, James E., Jr. The Fictional Technique of Scott Fitzgerald.        
The Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1957                                                 
-                                                                           
  _____. F. Scott Fitzgerald: His Art and His Technique. New York: New      
York University Press, 1964.                                                
-                                                                           
  Mizener, Arthur F., ed. F. Scott Fitzgerald: A Collection of              
Critical Essays. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1963.                     
-                                                                           
  Perosa, Sergio. The Art of F. Scott Fitzgerald. Ann Arbor:                
University of Michigan Press, 1965.                                         
-                                                                           
  Piper, Henry Dan. F. Scott Fitzgerald: A Critical Portrait. New           
York: Holt, 1965.                                                           
-                                                                           
  Trilling, Lionel. "F. Scott Fitzgerald" in The Liberal                    
Imagination. Garden City: Doubleday, 1950.                                  
-                                                                           
  CRITICAL STUDIES- ARTICLES                                                
-                                                                           
  Bewley, Marius. "Scott Fitzgerald's Criticism of America." Sewanee        
Review 62 (Spring, 1954), 223-46.                                           
-                                                                           
  Bicknell, John W. "The Wasteland of F. Scott Fitzgerald." Virginia        
Quarterly Review, 30 (Autumn; 1954), 556-72.                                
-                                                                           
  Cowley, Malcolm, "Third Act and Epilogue." The New Yorker (June           
30, 1945).                                                                  
-                                                                           
  Dyson, A. E. "'The Great Gatsby': 36 Years After." Modern Fiction         
Studies, 7 (Spring, 1962), 162-67.                                          
-                                                                           
  Fussell, Edwin. "Fitzgerald's Brave New World." English Literary          
History, 19 (December, 1952), 291-306.                                      
-                                                                           
  Hanzo, Thomas A. "The Theme and the Narrator of The Great Gatsby."        
Modern Fiction Studies, 2 (Winter, 1956-57), 183-190.                       
-                                                                           
  Hemingway, Ernest. "Scott Fitzgerald" and "Hawks Do Not Share" in         
A Moveable Feast (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1964), 145-191.        
-                                                                           
  Hindus, Milton. "The Eyes of Dr. T. J. Eckleburg." University             
Studies in English, 3 (Spring, 1957), 22-31.                                
-                                                                           
  Ornstein, Robert. "Scott Fitzgerald's Fable of East and West."            
College English, 18 (December, 1956), 139-43.                               
-                                                                           
  Schneider, Daniel J. "Color-Symbolism in The Great Gatsby." The           
University Review, 31 (1964), 13-18.                                        
-                                                                           
  Scrimgeour, Gary J. "Against The Great Gatsby." Criticism, 8              
(Winter, 1966), 75-86.                                                      
-                                                                           
  Stallman, Robert W. "Conrad and The Great Gatsby." Twentieth Century      
Literature 1 (April, 1955), 5-12.                                           
-                                                                           
  Thale, Jerome. "The Narrator as Hero." Twentieth Century Literature,      
3 (July, 1957), 69-73.                                                      
-                                                                           
                         AUTHOR'S OTHER WORKS                               
-                                                                           
  This Side of Paradise  (novel), 1920                                      
  Flappers and Philosophers  (short stories), 1920                          
  The Beautiful and Damned  (novel), 1921                                   
  Tales of the Jazz Age  (stories), 1922                                    
  All the Sad Young Men  (stories), 1926                                    
  Tender is the Night  (novel), 1934                                        
  Taps at Reveille  (stories), 1935                                         
  The Last Tycoon (unfinished novel), ed. Edmund Wilson, 1941               
  The Crack-Up  (essays), ed. Edmund Wilson, 1945                           
  The Stories of F. Scott Fitzgerald. A Selection of 28 Stories, ed.        
    Malcom Cowley, 1951                                                     
  Afternoon of an Author (uncollected stories and essays), ed. Arthur       
    Mizener, 1957                                                           
  The Letters of F. Scott Fitzgerald, ed. Andrew Turnbull, 1963             
  Letters to His Daughter, ed. Andrew Turnbull, 1965                        
-                                                                           
-                                                                           
         THE END OF THE BIBLIOGRAPHY FOR BARRON'S BOOK NOTES                
                F. SCOTT FITZGERALD'S THE GREAT GATSBY                      
                                                                            
                                      1932                                  
                                                                            
                               WILLIAM FAULKNER'S                           
                                LIGHT IN AUGUST                             
                                                                            
                              by Michael Gallantz                           
                             Communications Program                         
                       School of Business Administration                    
                      University of California at Berkeley                  
                                                                            
                               SERIES COORDINATOR                           
                          Murray Bromberg, Principal,                       
                Wang High School of Queens, Holliswood, New York            
      Past President, High School Principals Association of New York City   
                                                                            
                                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS                             
      Our thanks to Milton Katz and Julius Liebb for their contribution to  
                             the Book Notes series.                         
            (C) Copyright 1985 by Barron's Educational Series, Inc.         
   Electronically Enhanced Text (C) Copyright 1993, World Library, Inc.     
                                                                            
CONTENTS                                                                    
                               CONTENTS                                     
                        SECTION............................ SEARCH ON       
                                                                            
      THE AUTHOR AND HIS TIMES............................. FLIGAUTH        
                                                                            
      THE NOVEL                                                             
      The Plot............................................. FLIGPLOT        
      The Characters....................................... FLIGCHAR        
      Other Elements                                                        
           Setting......................................... FLIGSETT        
           Themes.......................................... FLIGTHEM        
           Style........................................... FLIGSTYL        
           Point of View................................... FLIGVIEW        
           Form and Structure.............................. FLIGFORM        
      THE STORY............................................ FLIGSTOR        
                                                                            
      A STEP BEYOND                                                         
      Tests and Answers.................................... FLIGTEST        
      Term Paper Ideas and other Topics for Writing........ FLIGTERM        
      Glossary............................................. FLIGGLOS        
      The Critics.......................................... FLIGCRIT        
                                                                            
      Advisory Board....................................... FLIGADVB        
                                                                            
      Bibliography......................................... FLIGBIBL        
                                                                            
AUTHOR_AND_HIS_TIMES                                                        
---------------------------------------------------------
Electronically Enhanced Text (C) Copyright 1991 - 1993 World Library, Inc.

